Christopher Kabakis (00:01.941)
Welcome everybody to the Inner Shift podcast. I'm super excited to have with us today, Seider, partner at Lead Forward. Mai, you're Danish, my background, Danish and British, you told me before. But you have been living in Germany for 15 years now in different locations, Hamburg, Berlin and Nuremberg currently. And you have a lot of leadership.

and management experience. Vestas Wind Systems you shared before like a Danish company. Then GfK, might know it as Gesellschaft für Konsumforschung, quite a mouthful. And then now currently at Lead Forward, you have been there for six years now. So lots of experience. And of course, at the Inner Shift, we are always interested in

transition moments and turning points in people's lives. so let me ask you right away a big question. what were the major turning points in your life as a leader, as an entrepreneur, as a consultant? And what have you learned from them?

Maj (01:18.06)
Thank you. Thank you for the introduction and also thank you for this quite big opening question. I need to think about where to start.

Maj (01:32.207)
Mainly Danish roads, the bridges, sit longer back.

Maj (01:40.462)
And maybe I don't want to start talking about leadership right away, but more some of these key turning points that probably shaped me as an adult. Because I think adult development make you the leader, the entrepreneur, and in my case, also the consultant that I am. I think professionally.

coming out of university and starting back then at Vista Wind Systems, I was incredibly lucky to already be exposed to a lot of very, very challenging tasks from day one. I am, I heard from a few people, an energetic, fast-moving person. So coming out and first learning that, wow.

Christopher Kabakis (02:31.579)
Thank

Maj (02:36.566)
It's actually not possible to be that fast when you don't know it all. When there's a big, big new unknown space to navigate, not only from a professional perspective, but also from a global perspective, coming out of your little local country cocoon and into a big world of interaction and cultural differences and so on. I think that very, very, very early.

started shaping a understanding of a big world of complexity that we are in that has shaped me a lot. I'm very, very, very happy that I had some years before I was given my first leadership role because I think I basically what I did back then, I started in a global HR department, which was very progressive. So there was a lot of

very, very great stuff taking place. We were a really, really big team and I was working on global process development and rollout within performance management, succession management, competency management, these topics on a global scale, also in a fast growing.

company. mean, I remember entering and it was the growth was so fast that we didn't even have desks enough. All of us back then, it was actually a topic because we were all coming to the office every day. Right. So it was, it was exciting and it was very, very wild to find your way into because you just came out of the school bench basically. So, in the, for the first years, that was what I did. And I think.

Christopher Kabakis (03:59.515)
Thank

Maj (04:20.598)
It really did shape me a lot to figure out, you know, it's fine to come into a complete unknown. You will figure it out if you build up step by step. So I think I already started to create some resilience very early on around not knowing it all. What also happened at that time was I was exposed to completely different fields of

Christopher Kabakis (04:38.181)
Mm-hmm.

Maj (04:49.122)
work. So at some point I was asked, would you mind going into one of the business units and work within quality management? I was like, quality management? So all of a sudden I was sitting in a team of quality engineers and experts. And I remember it was like, I showed up on day one full of energy and excitement. And it was again, this moment of realization. wow. I don't know anything. Right.

Christopher Kabakis (04:57.807)
Thank

Okay

Christopher Kabakis (05:17.637)
He he.

Maj (05:18.68)
So this notion of they speak English, it's all in English, it's international here, but I don't know actually what they're saying. I don't understand it. And how that could somehow make me feel very uncomfortable. But at that point, I also knew, you know, let's just start looking into what this is about. Let's be curious about it. Let's ask questions. Let me...

explore and learn from these colleagues, I bet if I tell them, I don't know what it means that they will take the time to explain. And that was, of course, also what happened again. So after three, four months, I also spoke quality, so to say, and I could actually navigate in that environment. So I think those very early exposures to this crazy, OK, I need to step into this. I just need to be patient with myself and take the time to learn and I will figure it out.

also shaped me a lot as a leader because when that shift then came and my first leadership role was another big life transition because I was asked if I would take a job outside Denmark. So that was actually when I moved to Germany. So not only did I take up a leadership role the first time, I also did move to a new country. I took a team of

more than 10 people in the first role and they were not only based in Germany, they were also based in Poland. And we were, I was taking over a area that had to be established. So it was somehow there, but quite fresh and there were no somehow standards or processes or tracking or anything. So the whole kind of the, the org design was set in its structure, but not in its operational setup.

Christopher Kabakis (06:54.875)
Thanks

Maj (07:11.158)
So here we go. think that was another complete unknown. And I think I already benefited a lot from having a bit of patience with taking the time to look at this whole system and figuring out what is it and what is in it. So these things have been key turning points, has actually been being exposed to what I did not.

know much about, but what people trusted me to figure out very quickly. I think what has been my challenge in all of that. You probably will come back to that later, but of course these moments have been full of paradoxes of what is the speed I need to take and where do need to be slow.

Christopher Kabakis (07:43.322)
Mm-hmm.

Maj (08:05.838)
How do I navigate this shift the best possible way, not only inside myself, also what do I show? And thirdly, what is the system expecting from me? Right? So that's somehow both very rational, but also emotional in our negotiation and outer negotiation is a difficult one to go through.

Yeah, what I talked about now was a lot of corporate experience. So turning into leadership. You also asked me about the key turning points that shaped me as an entrepreneur, as a consultant. Yeah.

Christopher Kabakis (08:54.418)
Yes, before you continue, I just wanted to say, it sounds like your first leadership position experiences were an ideal preparation for the consulting board because when you always are thrown into kind of the unknown and you don't know anything about the context, you need to be curious and as you said, also patient and learn very quickly kind of how to navigate in this new environment. And of course, any consultant coming to a client is in that position.

So I feel like these initial leadership positions were a great preparation maybe for consulting role later. That's just one reflection, something that comes up for me when I hear you speak.

Maj (09:24.876)
Yeah. Yeah.

Yeah, yeah. think my whole 12 years in corporate environments has shaped me a lot as a consultant, right? And has given me the best position to be in this role today. First of all, from exactly what you just said, you know, what is also the life of a leader in those organizational systems? What does it feel like? Not only what does it look like on paper?

So in that space, but also understanding these organizational dynamics and what is possible and what is difficult and what is impossible. Right. And I was probably in my first years, corporate careers. My roles were, what can I say? They were, it was kind of, of, of defined what I needed to do though difficult. So I could navigate that as I grow into.

a more senior position and especially at my time at DFK where I was holding a big role in an organizational transformation. So basically my role was in the company strategy to lead the future culture. It was called so the culture agenda. And that of course became an even bigger

Christopher Kabakis (10:49.258)
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.

Maj (10:54.974)
unknown, but also one where I couldn't really learn just from looking at other people and what they do. But when you work with culture, all of a sudden you actually need to somehow shape it and shape the agenda and figure out what good will look like in a completely different way. There is no recipe. Right. So I think that was when my first feeling of

Christopher Kabakis (11:03.899)
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.

Maj (11:23.896)
Being a bit of an entrepreneur, I became aware of that because you have to use a lot of entrepreneurial spirit in such a role, right? Not only in terms of what your work outcome looks like, but also how you interact with the bigger system, right? Because working with culture and an organization is not something you can do in a little corner office somewhere, and you have to be hugely.

Christopher Kabakis (11:32.731)
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.

Christopher Kabakis (11:42.779)
Mm-hmm.

Maj (11:52.362)
engaged with the bigger system to figure out what is right and wrong, what is the right approach, how does it connect to strategy and how do I actually activate it. I'm just the one person with a team, a great team, but we need the whole world here to become active.

Christopher Kabakis (12:09.563)
Yeah, and what I hear is also, I mean, it's a transition to entrepreneurship, kind of also real ownership and thinking beyond the definition maybe of whatever your job profile says, in a way. But it's also then the story of moving from management to leadership. And let's say that management is more the technical aspect, how to do it right, I don't know, all the things you can learn maybe even from others. But then the leadership role is really, as you alluded to, stepping into the unknown.

There is no defined path. I need to create a path for me and for the organization. And then I need to hold much more and be able to hold the tension. And before you said something really interesting and beautiful, you said like, so there were three levels actually. So there's how do I hold myself, the tensions in myself, then how am I with the others? So what do I show also to the others? How much do I reveal about what's inside of me? And then what does the system want?

What does the organization want or need? And so all of those levels, I mean, create tensions and I need to be able to hold the tension and also navigate it well. Right. So, and for me, this, this then is really leadership. It's not, it's much more than, than just how to manage people or to manage an organization. Right. I don't know how you feel about that, this reflection deck. And then of course I'm curious to hear about this journey to even more entrepreneurship or an entrepreneurial mindset in your roles.

Maj (13:38.798)
Yeah, I think, I I said in the very beginning, this idea of keep maturing as an adult, right? This is exactly what it is. So I think if I think back in my first leadership role, if I think back, I can be able to put those words on it now. But if I think as myself back then as 30 years old and just moving to a new country and doing all of that, I was not aware about it. I was not so aware of...

Christopher Kabakis (13:57.435)
Mm-hmm.

Mm-hmm.

Maj (14:07.682)
what's inside myself, what is in my head, what is in my belly, what is in my heart. What do people expect from me and how does that fit together? And this whole negotiation, I can see that now, but I was definitely not aware of that back then. Today, I think that's the big difference. So many years later as a leader that I do recognize that

that is a thing you need to spend time on, all of it. So probably in my younger self, was busier. If I look at the time I invested in those different spaces of myself, I was more busy with the perception of others. How do I deliver? How do I perform? How do

Christopher Kabakis (14:41.819)
Mm-hmm.

Maj (15:01.806)
Will I be successful? What do I need to achieve here to show that I can do this? Let me show that I can do this. I think today it's a different thing. I do know that that side of performance comes with also being a very strong, stable person who is there for a bigger intention, not just yourself, but you have to hold on to yourself to do that for the bigger group.

Christopher Kabakis (15:06.715)
Mm-hmm.

Christopher Kabakis (15:30.203)
I mean, makes sense that, mean, initially, I mean, by the way, you don't show the 30 years of experience in leadership position. It is at the beginning more intuitive and more outward oriented and then later kind of more inward oriented or directed, self-directed. I think that makes a little sense now in the individual maturation process that happened this way. Okay. Okay. Okay.

Maj (15:51.02)
Yeah, yeah. don't have 30 years of, I was 30 years old when I took the first bigger leadership roles. Exactly.

Christopher Kabakis (16:00.675)
Yeah, let's not dive deep into the age question. Yes. So, but you were about to say kind of, okay, you came in the later stages at GFK, you were more and more embracing this entrepreneurial role. And maybe you wanted to get to somewhere there and then also later the transition maybe to the next role. Yeah.

Maj (16:23.968)
Yeah, yeah. Yeah, so I think what I what I did discover there is, I don't know, I loved working in those roles the first years of my career, I found it amazing to be in these big systems and, and work with the whole systems and learning step by step that the way I did that was through human interactions, lot of human interactions connecting

exchanging ideas, figuring ways to include perspectives from the whole world. But I've caused also felt that, I don't know, sometimes there's a bit of a corporate misfit that maybe I'm too entrepreneurial in some pockets sometimes to fit a long-term role. Maybe my energies are better used in broader.

context in this world. So maybe I should go into consulting of some kind. And that's when I made the shift to lead forward. And that was again a complete new learning journey that started then six years ago, right? Where I could luckily build a lot on the corporate background and everything that gives you, but also all of a sudden being exposed to

Christopher Kabakis (17:31.183)
Mm-hmm.

Maj (17:49.876)
NGO work, startups, scale-ups, right? A lot of them in Berlin. And also public organizations. all of a sudden that was just, yeah, whole new pockets of unknown opening up. Plus, of course, operating a smaller organization meets involvement in everything.

Christopher Kabakis (17:54.457)
Yeah.

Maj (18:17.398)
Right? So leadership all of a sudden also is managing budgets, which I also did in the corporate context, but you manage the budget, the top budget ownership. You shape culture completely from end to end of what you want and what you believe is right. You try your best.

Christopher Kabakis (18:18.075)
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.

Maj (18:45.41)
look for people who fits that to join you. You need to think about what is the, how do we really bring this brand alive out there? How do we stay true to ourselves? What is the right way of thinking about utilization of client time versus internal? That's a lot, a lot, a lot of new questions that you need to start engaging with, right? So that was the next chapter.

with a lot of new unknowns and stepping into those.

Christopher Kabakis (19:17.019)
And so maybe, yeah, we talked a bit about the your vision when you came to lead then in this kind of ownership, entrepreneurial mindset as well, willing, really putting yourself into the organization as grows, as you said, like shaping everything budgets, public perception, internally the culture, being involved in everything and having such a footprint there as well.

how did you shape the vision? are the important characteristics of it? And maybe also because I noticed on your website and on social media, we can see creativity, playfulness. Those things are very important also to work co-creatively. So maybe you can tell us a little bit more about this unique approach that also defines maybe how you do consulting at Lead or with Lead.

Maj (20:15.298)
Yeah, I think what I always somehow experienced in corporate context was always wondering a little bit, why is it often in those systems that we act and think so different than when we are in our everyday lives out there, right? Why don't we just become a little bit more pragmatic and conversation driven and

Christopher Kabakis (20:34.575)
Mm-hmm.

Maj (20:42.38)
Why do we need so many PowerPoints to explain something that maybe just could sit in a conversation and an agreement? Right. So this pragmatism, I think, is probably also one of the things I stand very strong for and can do quite easily. But it does, and I said that earlier, it does involve a lot of interaction on our...

Christopher Kabakis (21:00.635)
And.

Maj (21:09.422)
on the human side, engagement with opinions in the systems and not just sitting and shaping works on paper. And luckily with Team Lead Forward, was also strongly a belief that we could co-shape out of that. actually our, it's sharp, playful and open-hearted came up in a team workshop working a bit with the

Christopher Kabakis (21:10.832)
Mm-hmm.

Christopher Kabakis (21:17.455)
Mm-hmm.

Maj (21:37.366)
the brand perception and they have lived ever since and they became such a strong fundament for what we stand for that even when we recruit new team members, that is actually what we look for. We look for people who are sharp, playful and open hearted in one. And when we ask clients, are we doing that? Are we actually standing for that? They all say yes. So in the end, what that is, is a bit of a mix of

very important elements of how we do consulting. Of course, we need to understand the client business. We have to be sharp around that. We also need to be sharp around what we do, how we do it and when. But we also think a lot of powerful moments can come out of being a little bit playful, maybe even.

in some cases pragmatic, maybe even in some cases a little bit silly because if we are silly when we unlock something in our relations that we didn't see before. And the openheartedness is of course a lot showing up and daring to just be there as full human beings with the groups and teams we're working with and yeah, taking time, asking questions, being there for our...

partners in the organization not only to fix our to-dos and achieve together, but also recognizing that when we work with transformation and change, that it's also really hard work and it's hard on people. And sometimes in those relationships, before we go and do, maybe we also take time just to support the people who are holding those big projects internally and be a partner for them.

also on a human side. So that's kind of the three aspects and how they play together.

Christopher Kabakis (23:29.797)
Mm-hmm.

Christopher Kabakis (23:34.299)
Yeah, totally. I can relate to this approach, I think, to move away from the slide decks and the presentations and documents and so on. Like sometimes in my work, with my head as a communications consultant, I've said like PowerPoint is for people with power who can't make a point. And you want to get away from that and maybe move, as you said, more with

towards a conversational approach much more, which is also what we say when approaching the speaker coaching, for example, no, make it conversational. So not like I have to send information and that will do the work. No, it doesn't. So but be much more interactive, engaging, as you said, much more feel yourself into the social system and the cultural system that is the organization. And in those conversations and the interactions, you start to

get a much better feel, no? I hear you say, and then also be able to shape it through the relationships individually. And then you say, OK, then we bring in this kind of the open heart and also the lightness or playfulness into it because it's hard work. And it's often hard moments if it's a transformation in the organization. And yeah, I want to ask about that. So isn't it then sometimes you have to get pushback from leaders and organizations who say like,

Why playful? I mean, this is serious work. So this is like hard. So how can you like be playful here? So how is that in your work?

Maj (25:08.492)
Yeah, absolutely. But I don't know, I think it's really a matter of when you bring out playfulness and how you do it. Right. So probably the first thing is not, doesn't have to be that playful. Right. You almost need to build a bit of a trust level to be able to do that. I can give you one example. I think if you do also intense

team days as leadership teams. instance, you discuss strategy, you figure out how to do things together. There is a bit of playful needed to light up the energy in the room. And I think in many cases you can do many funny things, but I like to do things that also brings the open heartedness in play. So one thing that I have done with

leadership teams and also very, very senior leadership teams. And when I started, they look at me like I'm nuts sometimes. I think they're going to throw me out of the window now. And afterwards, I would typically hear that that was the nicest moment of the day. So I've done, for instance, a little concept that is called a feedback cocktail bar.

Right? So I basically bring little cocktail shakers, little bright green, really bright green cocktail shakers. I bring non-alcoholic and alcoholic ingredients if the context allows, and mint and lime and different little syrups. And I line it up like a beautiful little bar. And then I give these different ingredients different aspects of...

I would say human qualities. So friendly, kind, caring, generous, these kind of things, right? So I give the lemons maybe care. And I ask the leaders to look at all of these ingredients and then I team them up two and two and they have to shake a cocktail for each other. Serve it in a glass and

Christopher Kabakis (27:08.047)
Mm-hmm.

Maj (27:24.546)
tell them why that feedback cocktail has the ingredients that it has. So it's an example of something that is of course really, really funny and people find it funny to shake the cocktails. But when you then go back to your little table to serve the cocktail for each other, the conversation actually gets very serious because it's a moment of...

Christopher Kabakis (27:29.307)
Nice.

Maj (27:48.344)
human relationship, building relational trust, feedback to each other that we might not normally spend so much time on. So that's one little example of how playfulness is not just fun, it always has a deeper intention.

Christopher Kabakis (28:05.403)
And this is the ingredients. stands for qualities you see and appreciate in the other, or is it for qualities that the other person could have a little bit more of?

Maj (28:16.654)
That is then another element I have given it sometimes is to take a second round where you say now use it for a feedback round of where you think your peer could actually shine more as a leader. Right. So that's, that's another round. Yeah.

Christopher Kabakis (28:30.223)
And by that time they're already drunk, so it goes down more easily. Only with the alcoholic option we're permitted.

Maj (28:38.878)
Exactly, exactly. And I usually would do that only as the last thing of the day.

Christopher Kabakis (28:45.467)
So in this way, mean, your role model also a new form of leadership for the leaders in the organization, right? I mean, the spirit you bring and the way you interact with them and the groups, hopefully, or I don't know if this is your intention, will also inspire the leaders to incorporate more of that spirit or even maybe some techniques, don't know, the cocktail drinking, shaking into their daily practice. Is that right? And so how do you think about the

old or traditional ways of leadership and the new ways of leadership that maybe you also emulate.

Maj (29:21.282)
Yeah, I do think we as leaders really have a big obligation to create space in general, right? And I think we only do that if we dare to remove ourselves from our screens and our PowerPoints and whatnot. Not that space cannot be created digitally, of course it can, but the space we need to foster is a space where we recognize that no one in this

world right now that is moving fast and is introducing new challenges to us. It's nothing new, but it's really, really fast at the moment. And we have a lot of crisis in the world to deal with. So I think leaders really need to recognize that it's not about me anymore. It's not about me anymore. My role as a leader is the we or the us even. I'm here for a much, much bigger intention.

Christopher Kabakis (30:11.195)
Thanks

Maj (30:21.076)
especially when you're in senior leadership roles where you have responsibility of something that is large of scale. You know, can have a team role somewhere, which is a bit more technical, but it's in the end not so different after all. Maybe the spaces you create look a bit different. So I think this courage to step away from my feeling of I have to prove I need to perform in this specific way and

leveling yourself a lot more as a leader to take a few steps back and actually somehow be the one who shapes the space for the bigger group of making sense together, building trust between each other and figuring out how to actually deliver things without being too complex, but again, making use of some pragmatism. I think that's what many leaders struggle with and need to find courage.

to do more of and exactly to your point, when you come in and show in two, three hours, we can do different. We can do different. We can create a space that is different. It does inspire many leaders too. And that's also the role we have in that context. Yeah.

Christopher Kabakis (31:38.337)
Yeah, mean, the leadership is space holding or the space creating. think that I love this metaphor. It's very rich, no? Like being a host at an event or sometimes even like thinking of it as being a conductor or so in an orchestra. And there's a famous TED talk by Benjamin Zander and he says like, I did this work for 20 years and it struck me at some point suddenly the conductor doesn't make a sound.

He depends for his power on actually making the others play well together. So I don't make a sound. I'm not the hero in a way. And so that kind of maybe speaks to what you were saying, like going from I to we from IQ to weak you from individual intelligence and focus to collective intelligence and focus and more like creating a space where the system can unfold differently.

So which means of course interactions between people and then we get directly to culture and all of those aspects. does it speak to you kind of this I mean host and a conductor metaphors when you is it something you bring in also in this sense?

Maj (32:53.656)
Yeah, I think it is no matter what, it's a recognition of what is my real role here, who am I here for and how am I here. And that it's again what I said before, is, and that's the conductor would also make it less about him or herself. It's about the bigger group, right? This is it. And I think it's probably many people listening now will think, hey, easier said than done. True.

Christopher Kabakis (33:12.506)
Mm-hmm.

Christopher Kabakis (33:22.011)
Mm-hmm.

Maj (33:22.552)
It's really difficult because there is a lot of speed expectation and there is a lot of work delivery expectation. But I do think leaders who don't find a way to do both slow and fast have a difficult time. I think if you don't manage to step away from fast and create slow, you can't.

Slow spaces, slow moments or relationship building moments or team cohesive moments or team clarity, team linemen moments. If you don't manage to do that, you can't be fast. That's the thing. You know, you can look fast. It can look like we do a lot, but actually what comes out in the other end is not fast. is...

clumsy and maybe not the best results very often. Right. So that is a big, big, paradox to manage as a leader. do I, when do I slow down, when do I slow us down to speed us up or when do I push speed? Because now that's the moment. And so I think that's, that is also an art of juggling or directing, right? Speeds. Yeah.

Christopher Kabakis (34:41.049)
Yes, yes, yes, yes. So there are lots of contradictions in the demands facing leaders and paradoxes, as you say, kind of, and tensions that are being created within us and between us and the outside world. And then inside the organizations, of course, through this. So fast versus slow, you said already, no. And maybe top down to bottom up.

No, I should be a clear leader, give direction, then I want to be participating and should invite contributions on that everyone should be focused on the now on delivering results, sometimes quarterly results that look good, but also invest for the long term. And I should step or make use of what is in terms of the strong business aspects now, but also invest into innovation.

So there's always kind of this short term, long term, top down, bottom up attentions. And it seems that it's getting faster and faster. And we have AI now supercharging many exponential curves, which we're already having. How do you help people kind of to cultivate the necessary capacities for this new time? And maybe what do they need to unlearn also? So old habits to unlearn and new habits to learn or capacities to build.

So how does it work? Could you give us some examples, maybe also from your practical experience?

Maj (36:05.964)
Yeah. And I think, mean, right now it is, is really, that question is so good because we'd all, especially the whole AI wave coming in. think one thing that I definitely see is probably, I don't know if it's even more important or it's just important in a different way, but one thing that leaders really need to somehow

take responsibility around now is this whole aspect of critical thinking. So, we've probably, are critical thinkers, but critical thinking also in terms of what is this whole AI to us, you know, where and how does it make sense? And when we introduce it, how

How can I critically look at what works and not work, right? Not be too excited. Which is a bit against my personal nature of a lot of optimism, but I think this is the space where you can also apply critical thinking to get the best results out, right? You know, how might we really think critically about what we are doing, including the AI? And what we do...

I can't make a leader a better critical thinker. I can't make a leader a better person reflecting on slow and fast. I can't make that person, but I can bring a lot of awareness to how important this is. And that's what we do. So what we will typically do with leaders in the spaces of critical thinking forward, forward moving thinking.

Maj (38:00.098)
How am I conducting or operating my role as a leader, best possible in the paradoxes that are a part of our everyday life is that we do bring a lot of attention to those topics. Also, what are the power dynamics that I'm a part of? Let's talk about it. What are the patterns of how we make decisions and how

how am I a part of it or how can I influence it differently? So it is again to create proper space for that and to activate the wisdom in the room around it, right? To actually dare to put it on the table and say, this is not easy for any of us and allow the leaders individually to see themselves in that space of...

difficulties that they have to manage and make something out of it, right? What they take out of it, what they make out of it. I cannot control, but I can try my best to help them see it.

Christopher Kabakis (39:06.107)
Yeah, that I mean, that totally speaks to me to kind of create spaces for individual and collective sense making. So reflection and dialogue. And through this kind of we see we are not alone in this in this that we are all navigating these tensions and paradoxes as leaders. So we are together in this and we bring transparency to it. And also then maybe a shared understanding and a collective buy in something.

including those things which are often completely under the hood, like the power dynamics. Because I can have all the nicest, greatest ideas about what to do and how leadership should look like. But of course, if there are certain stakeholders have an extraordinary influence on the whole organization, then I can't do it because I need some safety for it. I don't know, we haven't spoken about this, but of course, psychological safety is so important. And as you said, people are like, OK, I need to perform as well.

I need to show that I can do it. And what am I measured against? So how is that? Like the difficulty maybe of dealing with power dynamics in these situations? How do you deal with it? Like, let's say you bring the leaders together of an organization, but then there is a supervisory board or investors or owners who might have certain more traditional ideas about what business means, what leadership means.

Maj (40:32.48)
Yeah, I think there is, again, bringing attention to the facts as they are. It's important. think a lot of organizations don't talk about these difficulties. It doesn't even have to be a negative thing. It's a fact how the organization is steered, right? And I think...

Christopher Kabakis (40:39.671)
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.

Maj (40:54.156)
What we can help the leaders with is, and that's coming a little bit back to this idea of fast or slow, know, what can we expect to change overnight? It's not a lot, but what can we, what can we somehow shape a personal aspiration to influence or a collective aspiration to your point? So when we actually have leaders together in a space and who might want to try.

to influence something to the better in their sense of better. How do we politically navigate that together? It's not fighting the system. The system is the system. It's working with the system and its politics and its power dynamics, but still trying and not giving up. Right. So that's often where the conversation takes us and that this is not in the very big context, something you can do from

today to tomorrow, it's something that you can try your best to influence in the system in a way that is not going too much behind walls, but like being active in the front with the right people. So it's about finding allies in the system. It's about, again, daring to take the conversation with the stakeholders.

I think there's a weird thing with the hierarchies happening that people think that even shareholders or top boards are not open for conversation. I absolutely think they are. I've never seen anything different. So who is it in my system who I think similar with in top leadership who actually has good connections to the board members, the shareholders, whoever who have the most power?

And how do we get ourselves to the table for that conversation and dare to do that? It sounds simple, but it is not, because it is steered by power and politics and all these things. I think when we have the conversation with senior leaders, even close to executives, they do leave with some courage to try to do things differently.

Maj (43:14.89)
And it's often a question about what is not important tomorrow, but what is the legacy that you hope to stand for later in life. So it's big questions that you have to put into the spaces, right? To really try to bring change. And on the other hand, it's also sometimes a very pragmatic thing. So we talk about speed as important, but if we don't make speed possible because we are so complex in everything we do,

Helping leaders to understand what speed can look like is also to try to do things a little more playful, a little bit more design sprint, collective, iterative. Maybe we have not been used to working that way and just sometimes trying to put team activities up in a different way and try it out also helps them. So sometimes what we do with leaders, it's also very practical.

But it can can foster big change. Yeah, so it's it's from big questions like power and politics to how do I operate a camp and board, right? And in the end, it's it's it's it's dependent on what is needed. And we only know what is needed if we take that first moment of our collaboration with organizations to understand that really well. Yeah. What is the impact we should have?

Christopher Kabakis (44:13.861)
Mm-hmm.

Christopher Kabakis (44:22.171)
Yes sir.

Maj (44:40.428)
in this context, right? It's not about the doing, it's about the bigger impact.

Christopher Kabakis (44:46.107)
Yeah, yeah. I think exactly as you say, like, so creating space for slowing down, like as I know it, it will be often do retreats and already without any interventions on site or whatever modalities you have, like just by already getting off site and slowing down. And you have time to reflect, stuff comes up that is stirring in you. Anyhow, you realize more what your values are and if you can do your personal reflections, but then in those interactions.

a new clarity can emerge and a new resolve can be found. then often we haven't realized that we were like in an unconscious fear dynamic of in power relations, right? But then when we talk about it, suddenly we can collectively say, okay, I think there's a case here. And I think people can assemble their courage and then say, okay, let's do this. Let's talk to the board. Let's talk to these stakeholders.

engage in a conversation, which is also what you shared is your approach kind of very much like engaging with people in conversations and interaction and not being afraid, right? But putting yourself out there and having the right balance of seriousness and playfulness to do it. And in the sense, it's almost like a dance. That was another metaphor that came to my mind, not just the conductor, the host, but also the dancer dancing with the system and seeing what's possible. Like politics, I think.

Konrad Adenauer said, it's like the art of the possible. And of course, every culture transformation or everything that we want to change in a whole organization or system is like the art of the possible. And then, as you say, like more practically, okay, identify allies, whom can we talk to and how can we move the thing forward together, right? Based on a new clarity around shared values and also this long-term perspective. So now what makes sense, of course, we want to have a great

performances here and great numbers. how does it look in 10 years or 20 years? Which story do I want to tell later to my kids? Or who have we been together, right? And there's a New Yorker cartoon I sometimes show in some of our retreat programs. it's like people in wrecked clothes sitting around a campfire. It's one older guy in what remains of his suit and then kids around it.

Christopher Kabakis (47:10.639)
this desolate landscape. he says like, yes, we destroyed the planet, but for a beautiful amount of moment in time, we created lots of shareholder value. So that's kind of the setup in this cartoon. I said, this is so true, right? the kind of often we are in some certain loops, conditioned loops, learned expectations, and we don't question actually

Maj (47:36.182)
Yeah. Yeah.

Christopher Kabakis (47:37.135)
the learned ways of doing. then I think probably super useful for you to come in with lead forward the team and then challenge, but in a playful, good, open hearted way. And then accompany people through a process, right? Of dialogue reflection and then of course, new tools, new kind of methods. And it's totally makes sense.

Maj (47:48.302)
Yeah.

Maj (47:56.578)
Yeah. And this time then, and then if we turn it inwards again to what's going on inside me, because I'm out there now with my team, with expectations. But of course, doing all of this as leaders, there are moments where we have massive successes. This is working. Wow, this worked. And that's also the opposite, you know.

Christopher Kabakis (48:15.877)
Mm-hmm.

Maj (48:18.562)
I think any leader, including myself, have really burned my fingers and doing really stupid things for the sake of my ambition or my plan. So when we burn our fingers, do we take enough time to integrate what happened? What do I learn from it? How will I do it different in the future?

Why did I feel like I burned hands? Is it because I hurt people? it because I didn't achieve what I wanted to do? Is it because I failed delivering? What happened here? So this art of creating space to integrate, properly integrate and make sense, I think, is then the individual side of it. And what we do with groups of leaders is also to

try to create spaces where even those more sensitive topics can be shared. So that would typically not be in the bigger groups, but it would be in smaller groups of group coaching or even one-on-one. Because this, think, create a lot of...

Leaders are actually able to help each other a lot more than they are aware of very often. So there's help coming to me. I felt heard and seen and it was not so different from how my peers have burned their fingers in the past. But also it's a part of life and let me be resilient around when it happens because it will happen again and I don't have to be so afraid of it, right? I'm always doing my best.

So think that's also important to put attention to that, what's happening inside myself.

Christopher Kabakis (50:15.311)
Yes, I mean, I can totally relate to this. The power of vulnerability, often underestimated, and then create spaces for people there to open up and be vulnerable and feel hurt and seen and how powerful that is as an antidote to burnout and to also fear. So just the sense of connectedness, a community is then so strong and carries you forward also, as a leadership team. think I've experienced this.

Maj (50:38.102)
Yeah, yeah. And I think actually those burn finger moments are the most powerful to make us resilient people because we learn from what we go through, right? And we know we can do it again. Yeah.

Christopher Kabakis (50:46.863)
Yeah. Yeah.

And yeah, because of course we always want to make it personal as well. So I'm curious, in your personal leadership journey, could you share maybe a moment of birdfingers or of failure or of really a crisis moment where you learned important things about whatever happened there? And could you share this with our audience?

Maj (51:17.536)
Yeah, think, luckily I burned my fingers quite sometimes when I was quite young. So that helped me grow up. I really have a few strong memories of being so keen on my delivery agenda that if I didn't

Christopher Kabakis (51:25.487)
Hehehehehe

Maj (51:47.202)
work the system fast enough to my sense of fast, I would try to shortcut. And that would be, for instance, skipping levels of leadership upwards to get my point through quicker and forgetting that I have relationships in the middle to take care for, not knowing that that was what I was doing, but really burning trust in why do you, you why are you, why are you playing?

playing our system this way, just because people like you in those positions. There is a political organization here you need to understand. So that's, I definitely did that really never out of bad intention. I actually did it because I wanted my projects to work out quick, but I recognized that I was really burning my relationships a few times. So.

Christopher Kabakis (52:25.659)
Thank

Maj (52:42.892)
I think that that's a big learning and it also taught me that just because I have one agenda and that's coming again from this probably relatively immature part of the leadership journey of the most important right now is not here, it's out there, it's what I need to achieve that my plan is a

part of a bigger plan, right? So this notion of never forget how things connects. You have to be able to step away and see yourself as part of a bigger system. The other example I have is, think most leaders, we don't even want to talk about that pandemic anymore, but yes, operating a consultancy with a group of people and then...

Christopher Kabakis (53:27.803)
Mm.

Maj (53:33.006)
being out there with clients, though the way we work with clients is we are not every day on site. But still being an organization that is a lot out there from one day to the other, not being able to do that anymore was a really scary moment. And I think if in that situation you are not able to be actually quick in thinking about how might we do

things different instead of just freezing. We could have burned off, burned. But we didn't and we found very creative ways of not thinking what is important to us, but how do we help the clients as possible right now in that situation. Let's go and talk to them how our help can be the most helpful. Where are their sufferings right now?

It was not a pleasant moment and I learned a lot from it in terms of how to get the team together, how to create the space to make sense of what did yesterday look like, what will tomorrow maybe look like and how do we go from there and then to the outward perspective of the clients.

Christopher Kabakis (54:31.845)
Mm.

Christopher Kabakis (54:48.539)
Yeah, this everyone has a plan until they get punched in the face. So by reality, and of course, those are both examples that you gave. The first is more personal individuals. So you have your own delivery agenda, your own personal objectives, and you want to achieve it now. And then if you're achievement oriented, you want to cut corners and make it quick. And, then understanding that, I mean, if you go into a big organization, it's you go to politics, and it's all about the relational system. And

individual interests also know and those dynamics of finding allies and feeling yourself really into the system and then influencing it from within that this actually is the way to go and not like look at, okay, this is my target, I want to achieve it. so this is releasing your agenda in a way and releasing your how you thought it would be working, right, to be more systems oriented and relationally oriented, relationship oriented. And the second case, I mean,

The plan is kind of how you have done business before, how consulting worked before. And then you get punched in the face by the pandemic, like I think many people. And then if you try to stick to the old ways, you might not make it now or burn out. And so to release this and say, and I hear what you said, like was like, really, okay, let's go to our clients, talk to them, what would help them most now. And then we do this independently of what we did before.

and we let go of everything that was planned in a way, right? this seems to be powerful and it's kind of fast, said, it's also kind of flexible kind of, systems are oriented or client oriented, of course, in this sense, needs oriented.

Maj (56:17.026)
Yeah.

Maj (56:33.998)
Yeah, exactly. Yeah. And then I think you can allow yourself that space of experimentation in something new, also in a situation like that. And then you can come back again, right? So something that is more aligned to the bigger picture and aspiration of your organization, which is fine. So it was a big...

big learning of how to act entrepreneurial, still holding on to the core values of your organization, which is also in that case, what we activated a lot was the open-heartedness, right? It's not about us. It's about the clients right now. And we're fine with that. So if we need to help them figure out how to use an online system, which they never used before, to be able to communicate, we do that for a few weeks, no problem, right?

Christopher Kabakis (57:01.211)
and

Christopher Kabakis (57:22.329)
Hehehehe

Maj (57:22.986)
Even that's not really what we normally do. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.

Christopher Kabakis (57:25.519)
Yes, yes. Yeah, very pragmatic also, said. Now pragmatism also one of the key insights. Yeah. And yeah, letting go of the plan or the ego or whatever. I'm not there to teach people how to use Zoom. Okay. Well, maybe yes, I'm there now. Okay. yeah, values. mentioned values a couple of times and it was already in this space when we talked about when you work with leaders and organizations. the...

Maj (57:30.797)
Yeah.

Christopher Kabakis (57:53.135)
for lead forward also, mean values are important, social impact, right? What's our social and environmental responsibility and so on. How do you navigate this in these times, especially, I mean, where there's almost like a backlash against certain trends that have been in place, like mining environment or climate or diversity and inclusion and so on.

How does it show up in your work? First maybe how you set it up at Lead and then how in the interaction with your clients, how this shows up.

Maj (58:31.726)
Yeah, so definitely at Lead Forward, I mean, we have even a legal commitment, which we have signed being a B-Corp organization. So the legal side, but I think the legal side doesn't matter so much. That's never been a question in the last few years that that's what we hold on to. Right. So it means dedicating 10 % of the profit to...

NGOs social purposes means living a really really strict travel policy so very very low CO2 emission constantly trying to become better it means treating employees and society in good ways and taking active responsibility we do

quite regularly dinners for leaders to actually sit down together in our space over a lovely dinner and talk about some of these what you just said now at the time now is actually asking us to do differently. How might we still hold on to what is what is our values are in in social social responsibility? And so I don't see

Christopher Kabakis (59:30.469)
you.

Maj (59:45.676)
I see some organizations who took a big shift and I see a lot of organizations who just keep it a little bit more quiet. And it's really interesting to have those conversations. How might we still insist on good, even we are asked to look more on the maybe the KPIs, the financial sides.

cutting costs, cutting costs away. There's a lot of that at the moment, but it's not at all gone. And I think, especially in the European context, there's really a lot of willingness to have conversations around it. And sometimes not in the official programs or initiatives or interventions, but then over lunch, over dinner, so that's what we keep doing and would never stop.

Christopher Kabakis (01:00:38.011)
Yeah, I mean, it's a crucial, very interesting question and has been for people, I mean, always, of course, how do you live your values or embody your values when the zeitgeist, so the atmosphere, kind of the collective atmosphere is moving into a different direction or it makes it difficult to live or embody these values, When other trend topics are on vogue, like, I don't know, less bureaucracy and we need to cut codes and it's about performance, we need to survive, right?

Maj (01:00:38.797)
Yeah.

Christopher Kabakis (01:01:06.363)
people feel like it's about survival. There's a scarcity logic and it's very different from the abundance logic that could also be there. And the scarcity makes you of retract and cut down and defend against. it's an interesting moment in time that this is happening. But as I hear you say, but there's also, I mean, at the European level, for example, maybe there's a space for unique

way to live our values, our collective values, and that you need to be pragmatic as always. that's kind of also one of the early lessons kind of the...

Maj (01:01:49.292)
Yeah, so I think there's a lot of family owned businesses with really strong value systems that still thrive. And that's lovely. We have a lot of foundation driven organizations, big large corporates also. And then you see they insist on climate goals, on human.

Christopher Kabakis (01:01:56.173)
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.

Maj (01:02:11.118)
There's a lot of good things and of course I have a big interest in supporting those systems to become even better. That's just, so from our organizational perspective, we do actually look at these things before we engage in client relationships, right? We don't want to go against the good trends of the world.

Christopher Kabakis (01:02:29.072)
Mm-hmm.

Maj (01:02:32.942)
or for those organizations where it's difficult if they have a willingness to become better, that's also really interesting spaces to support. So that's how we engage with the question of where can we with our approach provide actually value and the impact that we wish. Yeah, so that's I think how we navigate. It comes from the inside of who...

Christopher Kabakis (01:02:50.361)
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Yeah, we're...

Maj (01:02:59.426)
what the organization stands for, but it translates into the client work as well.

Christopher Kabakis (01:03:03.771)
Yeah, and I mean, anyhow, there's like a resonance process between you and your clients or potential leads. You as lead forward have also leads. And then of course, they sense they want to work with you because they sense that you embody certain values. No, not just the playfulness, lightness, creativity, but also then social impact being a B Corp and thinking for the long term. And I think it's a, I mean, we are really happy in Germany to have so many family owned and family operated businesses who have

automatically maybe, because I think in generational terms, more like a long term outlook, right? And not just quarterly. And I think what you already mentioned that before, like, when you bring together leaders around other topics, like the topic of legacy, no, who do we want to have been? And which role do we create for our children and grandchildren? think with this, you can get to people. And then of course, it's the out of the possible. So it is what it is now. And sometimes, of course, there's an emergency or there's urgency, but like not

Maj (01:03:46.018)
Yeah. Yeah.

Christopher Kabakis (01:04:02.239)
lose sight of the long term, but could be good for the kids and the grandkids.

Maj (01:04:07.694)
Exactly. And I think that's actually, mean, the long-term, what is the long-term? That's a very difficult question at the moment, right? So that's also sometimes we in some leadership context step into as a partner, right? How might we be able to navigate that unknown space as executives, right? By maybe even being able to bring that into...

some specific scenarios that could be the future. And in those, also need to include those questions, right? How does that then fit together? So really, really difficult, but really, really interesting. And sometimes, very often, we see that just trying, trying to go out there and trying to envision and trying to put words to it help.

leaders sorts their hats in terms of how to keep that long-term view in focus. Because it is easy right now, it is easier to look for tomorrow and the day after because it's so wild what might happen. We have learned that the last few years that we are lot less in control than we thought.

Christopher Kabakis (01:05:10.683)
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.

Mm-hmm.

Yes, I mean, in our work with Evolute, always say like, those are also the paradoxes. Of course, me personally or my organization, we are small and insignificant. Yes. And we are totally significant and important for the system, each of us and our organization, however big or small. So both can be true. Yes, I can't change the world, but yes, I can change the world through the way I am and how I live, how I am in relationships.

Maj (01:05:50.05)
Yeah. Yeah.

Christopher Kabakis (01:05:50.125)
And so that applies, of course, to every leader. this is one of the, I mean, it's very interesting paradox. Yes, I can be totally insignificant and totally significant. And this is like the question, how do I respond to what the time asks of me or of us? And if you ask this is, yeah, collectively as a leadership board, who do we want to be together? How do we want to answer to these challenges based informed by our values leads to very different places. And if you just think like, God, I have to do this now and you get reactive in a way.

Maj (01:06:04.246)
It's a choice, huh? Exactly. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.

Maj (01:06:11.598)
Yeah.

Maj (01:06:15.726)
Yeah.

Maj (01:06:20.268)
And there are probably honestly quite some people who should wake a little bit up and take that responsibility at the moment, right? I mean, we are in the space here in Europe, we are among very privileged people on this planet and it's time to step up, I think, and shape a future, which is what you said before, it's worth it.

Christopher Kabakis (01:06:32.74)
Yes.

Maj (01:06:41.742)
keep creating from a strong values perspective for our children, grandchildren, whoever comes, right? That's it. I mean, that legacy. To take responsibility for that.

Christopher Kabakis (01:06:47.205)
Mm-hmm. Yeah.

Yes. Our ability to respond, responsibility, yes. on a personal note, like your personal leadership journey, like, because we're having hit the one-hour mark, I think already. If you look back now at your leadership journey, including your entrepreneurial journey and your consultant journey, so everything that you've learned basically. So what have you learned about leadership? And also,

If you were to give your younger self a piece of advice, what would it be?

Maj (01:07:26.486)
Yeah, so I think I have touched upon it a few times. What I have definitely learned the most is to move away from myself and appreciate and respect the bigger intention of the whole system or the us, the we, we are here for.

I would definitely have given myself the advice back then to spend a little bit more time thinking about that and recognizing it and mapping it and putting my own agenda not aside but relate my own agenda more to the bigger picture.

I have learned that there is never one answer. Everything is typically a paradox. So just embrace those paradoxes. They are okay. They're part of our reality and it's never an either or. It is usually an end. So it is short term and long term and I can as a leader operate on both levels. It is.

slow and fast. is a lot of like on paper contradictions, but they're actually not. can play very well together. So how do you figure that? I would probably have advised my younger self to exchange more with mature leaders, to take more mentors into my context, probably at that stage less.

coaching, more mentoring, to listen to people being very relaxed around things I might panic about back then, right? Where I had very little resilience with people who had built that resilience by burning their fingers. So every time it feels uncomfortable for the young, not so mature leader, you know, go and share instead of keeping it inside yourself because it can actually make you quite.

Christopher Kabakis (01:09:19.771)
Okay.

Christopher Kabakis (01:09:32.859)
Thank

Maj (01:09:40.3)
sick, right? remember not, not, I've never been, been, been, I've never had stress or something that in my life, but I've definitely had stomach pain and heavy legs and all these strong body reactions being in that uncomfortable. Imagine if I had someone, have had more people, I've had great leaders, I have had great mentors, but I could have probably made even more use of that. Yeah.

Christopher Kabakis (01:10:07.643)
Yeah, so maybe and these are also then, is an advice that you said you would have given to yourself, but maybe also you would give to other people, other leaders, this kind of less focus on yourself and more on the relational environment, the system, so kind of a decentering. And then the

accept or embrace the fact that life is full of paradoxes and contradictions and that it's actually this is the underlying reality. And the more you can actually face and embrace a paradox, the better it will be. And then the leadership journey of maturation is kind of to be able to hold or learn to hold, learn to be with the paradoxes and then bring this into relationality, which leads to the third point. Then the talk to people, get coaching, get mentoring, speak more with people and share and then

This will help you move the tensions and the paradoxes within you also.

Maj (01:11:09.228)
which relates to what we talked about earlier, right? Take the time to integrate and make something out of it. Don't skip that. I mean, you won't be able to skip that, but take the moment to do that because it can help you mature and become more resilient.

Christopher Kabakis (01:11:13.093)
Yeah.

Yes.

Christopher Kabakis (01:11:19.673)
Yes.

Christopher Kabakis (01:11:24.515)
Yeah. And so when people are in transition moments themselves now today, maybe that's the piece of advice that you would give. Like it feels very fast and unstable, but then the importance of actually slowing down, taking the time, looking for support mentors you mentioned that can help me. That would be something they could do to make it better.

Maj (01:11:48.814)
Yeah, help you look at yourself in different ways, right? And I think that is helpful.

Christopher Kabakis (01:11:53.946)
Yeah.

Yeah, wonderful. Mike, is there anything we have left out of today's conversation and that you would have liked to share, you would like to share with the audience when it comes together such a big conversation about leadership, entrepreneurship, consulting, your own personal journey and experiences, but also your work in consulting and leadership? Is there anything that you would like to mention?

Maj (01:12:29.71)
I think I'm just looking here at my little preparation notes here. think scanning over it, it's really covered. And I think even in more depths than I would have expected us to get to, that's great. No, nothing else. I think, I mean, talking just and wrapping up, you just said it again, the transition moments, the transition moments are...

The most special moments that we learn in, think, throughout our leadership journey. And if we feel we are not in transition and we want to develop, we need to move somewhere else as leaders. is definitely also maybe an additional advice. Look at yourself and if you feel a little stuck and not in transition and you have that intention to keep developing yourself as a leader, it's probably time for a new one.

Christopher Kabakis (01:13:15.525)
Mm-hmm.

Christopher Kabakis (01:13:26.779)
Okay, yes, wonderful. We leave it at that. How can people connect with you? Where can they learn more about you and your work?

Maj (01:13:42.732)
So luckily not a big range of options. mean, I think the two easiest ones are LinkedIn profile, easy, it's my name, or our website, of course, which is Lid.Berlin. So short one. Yeah, exactly. And my site are on LinkedIn. I would love to connect with anyone who have listened to this who would love to exchange more and be a part of my expanded network.

Christopher Kabakis (01:13:58.063)
Lead up Berlin, lead forward the company. Yes, yes, wonderful.

Christopher Kabakis (01:14:13.125)
Thank you. Wonderful. Thank you very much for this conversation today and your time and your insights, both personal and kind of from a leadership perspective. And I'm sure we will have a follow up to this conversation sometime in the future and talk about how leadership is developing and how the world might look like in five or 20 years time. But I think we covered a lot of ground today. So I'm really grateful. Thank you, Mai.

Maj (01:14:42.018)
Thank you. Thank you for having me and thank you for the great work you're doing.

Christopher Kabakis (01:14:46.299)
Thank you. Bye bye. care.

