Christopher Kabakis (00:01.184)
Hello everybody. Welcome to the Inner Shift podcast. Today we have a very special guest with us, Constanze Buchheim. Constanze, you're the founder and managing partner of a rather renowned German executive search boutique company called i-potentials. And you're also advising the government on critical issues. Maybe for those who don't know, tell us briefly, what is executive search?

Constanze Buchheim (00:31.342)
Executive search is finding and placing the right leaders in the C-level or in the advisory board. So basically we find the next gen leaders.

Christopher Kabakis (00:46.804)
It's like Chat GPT or Google for executives.

Constanze Buchheim (00:50.478)
Yeah, well, a bit more sophisticated.

Christopher Kabakis (00:55.82)
I can imagine. Okay. So of course the Inner Shift is all about inner shifts, about the turning points in people's lives. And with you, of course, we have a very interesting personality here today, like a founder, entrepreneur, consultant, manager. And so it's not an easy first question or second question, but it's an interesting one and we see where it leads us. So if you look...

back at this long and storied history of founding and managing and advising. What were kind of crucial turning points or crossroads that you navigated? And how did you move through them and emerge out of it? How would you answer to this question?

Constanze Buchheim (01:49.554)
That's a big question. We could fill the whole session with it. So guess what is most important is stepping out of the system somehow. So I grew up, as most of us, with parents saying you have to become a solid and safe job and education and...

Christopher Kabakis (01:51.85)
Yes.

Constanze Buchheim (02:18.092)
education system, preparing us for working in a company. And I was working in, like I was intending to work in the capital industry and started there and I heard my inner voice right, right at once saying, okay, that is not the right place to be. And so I applied

to become the assistant of a founder of a company because they were really honest in their communication and I loved that honesty and just followed my gut and my instincts there and became the assistant of one of the most well-known founders back then in 2006 and worked with him, Lukasz Godowski and

I really could feel that working with him kind of, yeah, broadened my perspective. I know that there was one moment when I was really in fear and saying, okay, and what if the market is breaking down and we cannot go on here? And then he was looking at me and saying, well, then we move to the next market. And I was like, wow, it's that easy. And this started changing the way

I looked at things and I realized, okay, there is a difference in looking at circumstances and how they affect us. when I realized that I have a deep, deep, passion in leadership and yeah, people and in cultural topics, I realized that I will not be able to do it in...

Yeah, working for someone who's not focused on it. And I really wanted to create my own business and, and yeah, change the world by thinking about finding, creating the right leadership that is moving us to the next, to the next level. And this is basically how I decided to found i-potentials and my own company, which is was

Christopher Kabakis (04:36.556)
you

Constanze Buchheim (04:40.632)
part of a struggle as well, but we will come back to it a little bit later. And throughout my entrepreneurial story, I had a huge, how to say it, ambivalence with responsibility. And there was some part in me saying, I am responsible, I want to be responsible, I want to have my own company. And at the same time, there was...

There were some voices saying, actually I don't want to be responsible. And being in a leadership position in a leadership role myself, I always had this ambivalent fight and then because you were asking for turning points, I did a really special coaching in the mountains on the Mont Blanc. And I went there with thinking about dealing about, do I want to be responsible?

Christopher Kabakis (05:21.578)
Ha ha ha.

Constanze Buchheim (05:37.646)
or not. And then I really had a really special moment where I was leading the group and I felt like all the weight of being responsible for the people on the mountain in the snow and I was like, oh my God, oh my God, oh my God. And there was fog everywhere, I couldn't see a thing. And then it was really like, like in a movie, yeah, then the sun.

came out and suddenly I could see all the way, I could see where I'm going and there was this fresh snow and I had this feeling of, oh my God, responsibility means I can lead the way, can pave the way, I can give my shoes to the snow, so to say. My pace...

my thoughts, my intention, and it's not a weight that they're in my back. They can help me from the back. So I really had this really nice feeling of responsibility is something great. And this is when I really, really, really stepped into being responsible and taking responsibility.

Christopher Kabakis (06:59.916)
So leaving your imprints in a way with your own shoes. And this was when you had already founded i-potentials or that was kind of in that period before or like, was it in the first years of?

Constanze Buchheim (07:04.12)
Mm-hmm.

Constanze Buchheim (07:15.342)
No, no, no, no, actually, actually, it was in, it was really late. It was really late. It was so I founded Appotentures in 2009. And I had the like this experience, I think in 2021. So for years, for years, while being an entrepreneur, I had this

Christopher Kabakis (07:34.546)
Okay.

Constanze Buchheim (07:42.156)
ambivalent feeling of do I want to be responsible or not? And this resulted, like this had effects on my leadership style because I was recruiting for my own company and I tried to recruit people who are better than me can take more responsibility from me because I said, actually, I don't want to lead this actually, I don't want to be responsible. So I hired the best people. Yeah. And of

course, they had the hardest time because I was running the company for 10 years already. And I had the market feeling. had the understanding. I had the knowledge. And it was unrealistic to think that someone could step in and rule out the CEO or the leading managing partner. And this is when I understood the system.

systemic approach of organizations. If you are the CEO, if you're in the CEO position and you're deciding to stay in that CEO position, you are having the responsibility. And this is what I realized.

Christopher Kabakis (08:58.88)
Hmm. I remember in a previous conversation we had, you also say that this, your own personal realization process around your relationship with responsibility also informs today how you, advise, coach, talk to leaders, because you have a special eye for how they are able to respond, responsibility able to respond. And I think,

Constanze Buchheim (09:17.313)
Mm-hmm.

Christopher Kabakis (09:26.048)
You also point out when you feel that they're not living up to that claim or promise of responsibility. Is that right? So that actually it directly kind of this own personal process helped you, helps you with this role that you're having often. That's their advisory.

and coaching.

Constanze Buchheim (09:43.978)
Yeah, yeah, that's exactly the link. Because back then I realized that I'm having this hard time with responsibility because someone in my family did not take the responsibility he had while raising us.

And this led to the situation that we as kids had too much responsibility for things that we were not responsible. And that was the reason why I had this ambivalent relationship to responsibility. Of course I could do it. Of course I could take it. But the six year old girl still said, but I don't want to be responsible. And while I had been on the mountain there,

Christopher Kabakis (10:37.632)
Constanze Buchheim (10:42.892)
Yeah. I realized that this is my six years, six year old kid's voice and that I can decide now to follow that voice and say, yeah, but I want to protect it, which would be okay. Or I could say, no, I'm grown up. I want to have responsibility. I take that responsibility. And I realized that if I'm the CEO.

If when I want to stay in a CEO role, I have to decide for the more mature position. Yeah. If I feel I'm following the kid's voice, yeah, that's completely okay as well. But then I should not be the CEO because my organization, our organization needs the person in responsibility in the position that is filled with responsibility.

And this is what I realized. And when I realized this, and you know, there's a strong consequence in it, but there's also a gentleness in it. And when I realized that, I understood that this is true for any other leader. Any other leader telling me, I know that the organization needs this, but I am not this kind of guy. I don't want to do this. I can't do this because...

This is not me. And by having this process by my own, said, that's completely fine, but the organization needs it. And if you decide to give it to the organization and you basically decide to learn and to grow, and then you can stay and then you should stay in a CEO position. But if you decide, besides the fact that the organization needs you, not to fill that role.

That's okay as well, but then you have to leave that position. And this is so strong and so powerful for me and I have actually no fear of talking to anyone. when I'm consulting the government, when I'm talking to ministers, this is what I'm saying as well, because they have a role, they have a responsibility. And as you said, their role is to find answers, a response.

Constanze Buchheim (13:07.448)
to the challenges that we see. And if they're willing to find this response, okay. If they are not, just leave the place. Sorry to be that, but that really helped me to step into those positions and this helped me in my company.

because we are dealing with a lot of powerful CEOs and advisory boards and supervisory boards. And you really have to face, like act on an eye-to-eye level. And also in my consultancy for the government, this is really essential to really say what is needed to create the change in the system. And I really love doing that.

Christopher Kabakis (14:01.706)
No, it's great that you get away with it as well. I guess many people don't like to be challenged, And, but they also don't like people who are just like trying to please them. Right. So it's quite ambivalent, right? I don't want to be criticized, especially not in public, but I also, I'm bored or annoyed if people just say, repeat what I've said. So to challenge people in the right way that they can take it, is, is, not so easy. And, it seems you're.

Constanze Buchheim (14:07.213)
Yeah

Constanze Buchheim (14:15.224)
Mm-hmm.

Christopher Kabakis (14:31.052)
because of your own personal history and the sensitivity for this issue of responsibility ownership. You can be a great advocate, do advocacy for kind of what the organization needs. And then what I heard was you kind of managed to separate the role from the person. So you talk to the person about their role. So, and so it helps a bit taking the criticism maybe because you reflect together about

Constanze Buchheim (14:43.512)
Mm-hmm.

Christopher Kabakis (14:59.774)
Okay, what is actually my role here? And do I live up to what maybe the organization needs from me here, the company. And this way you kind of, or maybe it's part of what you do. to actually create acceptance for your challenge or the advice you give. Yeah. Okay.

Constanze Buchheim (15:16.512)
Exactly. That's exactly the point. Separate the role and the person. And the best situation is when the personality matches the role. But that's exactly what we have to reflect on. And where we have to take decisions as leaders. Do I want to fill that role? Do I want to make my personality?

match that role and the requirements that are linked to it. And this is where you can add the gentleness from my perspective, because what I'm saying is you as a person are okay as you are. And there's no judgment and there's no whatever. I accept you as a person as you are, no matter how you are. But in a role,

There are some requirements. And what I can judge on is the match between the requirements and what it needs. And this is exactly where we are judging. But it's a difference. It's difference. it's exactly the point.

Christopher Kabakis (16:36.364)
Yeah. What I liked also about like, what you said is kind of how, how, I can see, how, how people can maybe also the listeners can, can see, how like personal experiences in your childhood have shaped you and created a certain sensitivity, around certain issues, such as maybe here responsibility.

This then becomes a topic that you're working with. said the ambivalence for many, many years, even while already being in the CEO, managing partner role and in the responsibility, struggling with an ambivalence around responsibility and then resolving it somehow for yourself, getting this clarity, but after a whole process of working through it. So it gives like really depth to your, to your knowledge and understanding of the topic or the field. And then use that.

Constanze Buchheim (17:10.957)
Mm-hmm.

Christopher Kabakis (17:31.984)
productively in the world, for your consulting, your coaching and so on. how kind of it comes all from like early experiences into professional experiences, our own process, and then leads into the gift we can offer to the world. I think this is beautiful, like how you just shed a light on this.

Constanze Buchheim (17:37.198)
Mm-hmm.

Constanze Buchheim (17:51.47)
Yeah, exactly. But what is needed, and this is what I call mature leadership, and this is why I'm saying we need mature leaders who are reflecting on what's happening. If I would not be aware of this ambivalence and would not think about it, reflect about it, it would somehow still have an impact and a power.

over me and over what I'm doing. And this unawareness of something pushing me somewhere derives the quality of me being as a leader because I'm not fully aware of what's happening. And if I'm not fully aware of what's happening, I'm not taking aware decisions, you know, like conscious decisions. That's the better word.

And that's the one thing. And the other thing is that thinking about responsibility, like responsibility is basically a concept. And you can move on thinking about this concept further and further and further, because what happened then, like in the first place, was responsibility, yes or no. And I said responsibility, yes.

But the next step then was, okay, I'm responsible for everything. And then I had to reflect about, okay, what is responsibility? What am I responsible for? What does responsibility mean for the we, for the me and for the us? And really deciding.

if I'm responsible for everything. And that was another hard part of the story that came afterwards. So during the last two or three years, this was another turning point when I realized responsibility, yes, but I realized that I was taking forever, actually, basically too much responsibility, which was the reason I had this ambivalence.

Constanze Buchheim (20:13.376)
So it was really necessary for me to understand what is the me, what is the we, what is the us and who's responsible for what. And I guess there is a step after it as well. I'm right in this step, but I guess there is another layer on this as well.

Christopher Kabakis (20:35.414)
Hmm. Okay. Yeah. So, it's interesting. I think that's probably true with many issues. So at first level, it's like, yes, no. and just like, thinking a bit in a bipolar way, when we first like, deal with topics and then it gets more differentiated. So now it's like, okay, what's my role? What's the role of the others? the, the me, the we, the us and how to calibrate, it properly, my, responsibility or.

maybe also ownership. don't know if you distinguish ownership and responsibility. To calibrate it properly and to find this balance each time anew. It's a constant, it's a practice almost. No, it's like not, it's decided once and then it's clear. It's like, it's a practice that we live into with each meeting or in each situation in a way. Would you agree or how do you think about it?

Constanze Buchheim (21:17.166)
It's not.

Constanze Buchheim (21:31.758)
Definitely. Responsibility for me is really like in the wording, as you said. So it's not ownership for me, it's responsibility. Because ownership is another important thing. But who is responsible to find the answer, basically?

Christopher Kabakis (21:47.852)
Hmm.

Constanze Buchheim (22:01.72)
Yeah. And there was another turning point during my growth story when I learned, did a coaching and I learned about the concept of the rooms. Do you know that? The concept of the rooms? So basically, basically it was

Christopher Kabakis (22:17.78)
Maybe. I know some some room metaphors.

Tell us, tell us, and to listen to us,

Constanze Buchheim (22:29.582)
Yeah, that I learned, okay, there's a room around myself. And there is a room around the other person. And this room belongs to us and just to us. And if we're talking about relationships, this is what's in the middle between of those two rooms. And what we're able to

to create and to change is the room in between us, the relationship. But it's not my responsibility to step into your room and to change something there or to ask you something there. You take the decision. And it's not my responsibility at the same time then to think your thoughts, so to say.

For example, I'm not giving you a hard feedback because I'm afraid that you are running away. What I'm actually doing is I'm stepping into your room already because I'm saying, if I do this, you will do that. But it's, you will decide what you're doing when I do that. And I don't know. Yeah. And that's the difference. So if I'm saying, okay, I give a feedback and I put it in the middle of the...

of our rooms, then you are able to decide if you take it or not. And it's just my responsibility to put it there. It's not my responsibility to take responsibility for all your actions that follow. That's your responsibility. And this is what I had to learn the hard way and what helped me a lot to step into

my me part a little bit more. Because when I realized this concept, I realized I had been in the we part all the time. So I was always optimizing on the we, on connection, and I was taking too much of responsibility, which did not allow me, and that's the interesting, not only to step into the me, into my perspective and

Constanze Buchheim (24:52.206)
set boundaries and act in those boundaries, but it also did not allow me to step into the real us. Because creating the us includes my perspective and your perspective and all the others. And the ability to switch between those perspectives is what I call multi-perspectivity and is from my perspective.

the most important thing a leader at the top has to be able to do today.

Christopher Kabakis (25:30.304)
Hmm. Yeah. All of this, what you said speaks a lot to me. I think this, those ideas around multi-perspectivity apply both to personal or private relationships, as well as to professional relationships. And of course, then the different layers like team and organization. so there's the I-space, the U-space and the W-space, for example, in a relationship. And we can ask.

So not just what do I need or what do you need, but also what does the relationship need, which leads you totally different, down a totally different path. So what does a relationship need? It's like its own actor in a way, or its own entity that we can both relate to. And so the clarity, I think it's very important. And sometimes some people listening, they might have the issue of similar to you, that they take too much responsibility and they're not so much aware about,

Constanze Buchheim (26:06.637)
Yes.

Constanze Buchheim (26:16.824)
Yes.

Christopher Kabakis (26:29.504)
What do I actually need, for example, just an example, but it might for others might be the other way around. They just think about themselves and forget about the re-space or the you space. So I think people come from different trajectories in their lives and they have been shaped by different relationships in the past. And so they, they have a strength maybe in one perspective or maybe in two, but maybe not in all three. And so it needs to be consciously trained in a way or.

Constanze Buchheim (26:49.966)
Mm-hmm.

Christopher Kabakis (26:59.152)
It's a practice to be aware of this. what, you, as we said before, like, I mean, in your conversation with CEOs, you would say, so, okay, let's think together. What does the organization need? Right. And so this is basically, it's very similar to the, to this, what you just spoke about.

Constanze Buchheim (27:14.19)
Exactly.

Constanze Buchheim (27:21.398)
And there are, so I'm getting passionate about this. There are, I love thinking about that because there are so many blind spots in Germany. Yeah. So if we're talking to CEOs of huge companies, yeah, you would like, would have except expected that they're fully reflective and self reflective and that they understand all the dynamics. Yeah.

Christopher Kabakis (27:25.654)
Good. Good.

Constanze Buchheim (27:49.784)
But what they basically understand is what happens really in fact in the organization. And when I'm talking to them, most of them think they act in the interest of the organization. But if you listen to them, you hear, like I hear, that they're actually talking in their own perspective and that they are not integrating.

the us perspective, yeah. And then being able to help to understand the difference. How does a decision look like from the me perspective in this situation versus how does a decision look like from the we perspective? And making that difference is such an opener, an eye opener for most of them, because they think actually

that they're acting in the best interest of the organization. So it's not a bad intention, it's the reflection about

Christopher Kabakis (28:56.588)
Yeah, to create like a conscious space where you can reflect on these matters. And with a sparrowing partner, think is super valuable. Otherwise we tend to maybe conflate our own interests with that of the organization. And it's not the same. It happens in politics also sometimes. And as you say, like mature leadership is actually that I'm willing.

Constanze Buchheim (29:08.238)
Good night.

Constanze Buchheim (29:12.876)
Yes, yes, yes. Happens all the time there.

Christopher Kabakis (29:26.12)
look at these things, right, together with other people and kind of unveil kind of what's otherwise hidden and not clear or conflated. And I think, yeah, so it's important to bring these things into a space of discussability, you know, so that we can actually talk about it. Okay, this is your, would be your interest. This is your interest and this is the organization's interest and so on.

Constanze Buchheim (29:34.701)
Mm-hmm.

Constanze Buchheim (29:47.512)
Mm-hmm. Yes.

Christopher Kabakis (29:52.757)
Okay. Now let's make an educated decision about what we want here. So to give the, the we levels a voice. Otherwise they don't have, I mean, the voice, right? So, yeah. And it might only come from the external, from the stakeholders then the feedback otherwise, right? So they will criticize you because there's something off.

Constanze Buchheim (29:59.499)
Exactly.

Exactly.

Yeah.

Constanze Buchheim (30:12.621)
Yes.

And that's the reason why empathy and listening to your emotions becomes so important in the future. Because if we want to take those educated decisions that you were just talking about, we have to integrate other people's perspectives. And not only in the organization, but because we are

working in a global and complex world, and it is our task and responsibility to protect the whole world and not only our organization. Then we have to integrate that into our perspective. And to be able to do that, we have to acknowledge that diversity in any kind of diversity or dimension is necessary to take an educated

decision and that listening to intuition. So the things that you just realize are important and you don't know why. Because integrating your intuition doesn't mean integrating all the knowledge that is in your body and system [and]

using it as well in a very fast paced complex world as an intelligence system. But to be able to do that, you have to acknowledge that intuition is based on your experiences and therefore has an information dimension as well. And we have to integrate those informations as well. And this is something really, really, really new.

Constanze Buchheim (32:11.894)
for most of the leaders, especially in Germany. Because it means listening to myself, listening to my intuition, following my intuition, trusting my intuition and integrating those of the others as well. And that's so special. That's so special. it's a good...

Christopher Kabakis (32:31.212)
Mm-hmm.

Constanze Buchheim (32:39.094)
It's necessary, it become really necessary to be a really good leader to integrate that. It's not just a soft fact.

Christopher Kabakis (32:50.218)
Yeah, exactly. And it also needs a kind of cultural change, maybe. So because often people would ask, how do you justify your, how you act now in the world, how you move? And then you need to give facts or something coming from the head intelligence, rational analytical intelligence. But of course, as you pointed out, I mean, there are other levels of intelligence, like intelligence systems, such as the heart, such as the gut. Maybe the intuition is kind of the

Constanze Buchheim (33:09.752)
Mm-hmm.

Christopher Kabakis (33:19.328)
the gut or is associated with the gut, you could also say it's whole body intelligence. And there's some something that is tested, kind of hard to verbalize sometimes. you're being hard pressed to answer if someone says like, how do you justify it? Do you have like scientific references for this hard data? But you say, no, I don't know. I have a bad feeling with this here. Like, let's see, no? And that this is...

Constanze Buchheim (33:44.398)
We'll here.

Christopher Kabakis (33:47.702)
can be valid information, of course. It's not just for you to accept it, or to integrate it, but also, of course, it's a cultural challenge.

Constanze Buchheim (33:59.468)
And there is, like when I realized this, it's a funny story. I need to tell this as well. I heard of the Turkey phenomenon. Have you ever heard that? No, So I'm telling you this. So the Turkey, who was bought for Thanksgiving in the United States, he's bought

Christopher Kabakis (34:05.484)
Mm-hmm.

Christopher Kabakis (34:12.204)
I'm not sure, I know if...

Constanze Buchheim (34:29.318)
alive, yeah, and he's put into a cage and feed it for some weeks. Yeah. And on the first day, when the owner opens the cage and put some, some, some food in there, the bird is really anxious and full of fear because there's, it's not a good situation. Yeah. And there's this, this intuition. Yeah. And then nothing happens.

And the next day the doors opened again, get some food. This happens for weeks and weeks and weeks. And at some point, turkey realizes, if the cage opens, nothing bad happens. The problem is, someday is Thanksgiving.

Christopher Kabakis (35:08.908)
And it's getting better and better for the Turks.

Constanze Buchheim (35:29.418)
So the situation changes and the gut feeling, the intuition that was true earlier is true and was true. just by following the data of the last weeks, you could not tell what's happening next. The next day will not be the food day. Well, it will be food day, but for someone else.

Processing just by data and taking your decisions just by data because it happened like that for the last weeks is not true anymore because the actual world, the current world is like there's another Thanksgiving Day every day, so to say. So by just using the hard facts that are true for the last weeks a month is not valid anymore. We have to integrate into intuition again to take better decisions.

It might not be explained that well in English, but when I heard this Turkey story, I was like, this is why we have to integrate intuition. We cannot just follow the data. We have to combine both.

Christopher Kabakis (36:44.3)
Yes. I mean, at most things that are happening in the inter-relational space, like so in groups and in teams, they also presence to us on an intuitive basis. Sometimes I use the word atmospheric intelligence or something like you're kind of, have a feeling of something is happening in the space. And of course there's no data on this. you, mean, all the data wouldn't be very valuable.

if you could create data from analyzing people's behavior. So really to when, so because you said mature leadership before also attuned leadership, we sometimes spoke about that, like kind of that we're able to attune to others, which is basically then helping with our intuition. can help us, informs our reasoning then also the head function. It's like another data stream.

Constanze Buchheim (37:15.662)
You

Christopher Kabakis (37:39.405)
a level of data streaming that we can access. Right. And I would agree with you, as you said in Germany, maybe it's kind of often organized out maybe. And we need to encourage people to let it in again. It's a capacity we have, right. But it's sometimes organized out. It's a missing experience for whatever reason, cultural or individual experiences, individual conditioning, whatever.

I'm speaking about the personal, because I want to also hear more, or probably also listeners want to hear more from you, from your personal story. We started out with a personal turning points and you mentioned this kind of first starting in finance, capital industry set, and then realizing it's not for me, moving to entrepreneurship, Lucas and then starting out on your own, building your own company. And you pointed to this responsibility theme that

Constanze Buchheim (38:09.451)
Mm-hmm.

Christopher Kabakis (38:37.004)
goes from the early days to now. Our development is not just smooth and has nice turning points, but there might also be moments that are perceived as crisis, or it's really like a failure or a breakdown or something really challenging. Were there moments in your life or one? Can you give us one example of one of these moments and maybe what it was about and maybe what you learned from it?

to really get to know you also better.

Constanze Buchheim (39:10.774)
Yeah, of course. Of course. I think life is about challenges and dealing with those challenges and enjoying the moments when we are not challenged. But both of it is life. This is what I learned and helped me to cope with it.

My hardest crisis I had was so far in 2012. We had like two years of success in the company and it all looked good for the first two years. And the market kind of...

evolved and things like that. So I invested and grew the team and thought it would always be like that. Easygoing and this is how it's in the future. It's just going up. So I invested, I changed the office, like bigger office.

grew the team and I became pregnant with my second son. So my first son was born just before I founded the company and I was pregnant with my second son. during that pregnancy, the whole market changed. somehow our revenues decreased and we could not pay the team anymore. We could not pay the

the office anymore and I was pregnant in the six month. So kind of already had a time pressure because I knew like going from now there are three months. I will have to give birth. I want to give birth, of course. But I also had to give birth then. So there was this pressure moment and also like kind of complexity adding.

Constanze Buchheim (41:33.802)
In our family, everywhere there were challenges. At some point, we actually had no money anymore. Basically, we had been bankrupt and we had been cash flow financed. We did not have any money because we have a cash flow financed system. Basically, if you're not doing revenues, at some point you're running out of money. This is what happened.

It was really, really, really tough because I did not really understand it. And I could not sleep anymore. I was in panic. I was really like from my level of security. This was not where I wanted. Like I imagined myself giving birth to a second kid. So I was really on pressure.

When this happened, I was taking some advice from some friends and some consultants and they said, you have to take a decision now. You have to take a decision now if you want to fight and if it's so important for you that you're putting this in or you give up and you get baby and have a nice life.

are not an entrepreneur anymore. And in that situation, I felt like, okay, why is this happening to me? Why is this not happening to anyone else? Why now? And I've really felt a lot of pity for myself. And yeah, at some point I woke up and was in the situation of, my God,

Everything is not playing on my side. Everyone is against me. I'm in pressure, bad situation. And then I said, it would be really easy to give up. And then I imagined giving up, not being an entrepreneur anymore, not being in this creation part anymore, being in this responsibility anymore. And I said, I don't want this. want my...

Constanze Buchheim (44:01.696)
my, my eye pretensions baby to survive. I really want this and I will develop another image on what's happening now on another perspective on what's happening now. First of all, I have to accept it. Yeah. I have to accept that we're actually basically bankrupt. have to accept the fact that the market changed. Yeah. Because until that I have hoped.

And I thought it will change, will this, it will this. And I said, I have to accept it. Yeah. So first thing was accept the situation. And when I accepted the situation, something really interesting happened. Then I started gaining a different perspective on it because then I really can remember the day in the moment. Yeah. I was like, my God, this is showing me something.

that this actually happens is showing me that I'm still lacking a competence. Which kind of competence do I lack? Why could this happen? Maybe it's showing me that I was lacking a process. Maybe it's showing me that I'm... And then I was thinking about, what is this showing me? And while thinking about what is this showing me, I found all the answers that I needed to change.

Christopher Kabakis (45:22.7)
Mm-hmm.

Constanze Buchheim (45:28.844)
Yeah. And then I still had three months to go. And then I was really pushing on those things and saying, okay, obviously my planning was not good. Obviously my financial part was not that good. And I added this with the help of some advisors that I hired. And I created a security for the time.

like those six weeks around the moment of birth. And then just one week before my son Aska was born, like everything turned. And then I gave birth to my son and after six weeks I found a partner.

I got into the company who will do it with me in the future because I don't have to do those fights all alone. actually this moment of crisis was actually really, really, really, really worthy because it showed me so many things that I can still improve on where I have some potential. And it actually

helped me to tap into that potential. And it was really tough. mean, looking back at it now, like I just did, sounds inspirational. But I spent so many nights crying and really being in fear and having this responsibility for my sons as well. It was a lot of pressure.

Christopher Kabakis (46:54.284)
Mm.

Constanze Buchheim (47:21.452)
And I don't want to go there again, yeah, but it was really worthy.

Christopher Kabakis (47:28.204)
Hmm. Yeah. Thank you for sharing this. Uh, it really speaks to me. Uh, uh, kind of reminded me of this pain is a signal in a way. Uh, but as the Buddhists already knew kind of when we fight our experience, uh, so we are, create suffering for ourselves and when we accept, then, um, as you said, then suddenly we, uh, something new is opened up. Something can move once we accept reality as it is.

And then we can ask this question. what does it want to show me? So kind of the, the crisis as a signal. And then I get into a learning mode. No, I get curious again. how could this happen? Isn't it interesting if I'm not just like the victim of what happened kind of, huh. Okay. And then, and you said like, okay, maybe I need someone who else was planning and the financing wasn't done so well. And so, then maybe I, what I heard also, I mean, you said like, maybe I don't need to do it alone.

Maybe from this ownership responsibility, I'm the entrepreneur logic. You were running your business on the assumption that you need to do it alone. Anyway, you need to be able to do everything and then to realize, okay. The crisis shows me I don't need to, I can't, I don't need to. And so you said like I bought in a business partner and then they can take care of the things that maybe are not your strongest qualities.

And suddenly, yeah, out of this crisis moment emerges actually an updated version of yourself and of your business. And I mean, this is wonderful to kind of to, to hear this process. So it all starts with acceptance, right? and, seeing, taking, taking kind of whatever happens, even if it's unpleasant or highly unpleasant, taking it as a learning opportunity, which is, mean, people talk a lot about that sometimes, but I mean, to actually live through it, of course.

Constanze Buchheim (49:02.956)
Yes.

Constanze Buchheim (49:11.116)
Yes.

Constanze Buchheim (49:18.114)
Yeah.

Christopher Kabakis (49:26.364)
the way you did changes.

Constanze Buchheim (49:29.1)
Yes, definitely. talking about acceptance, the aspect for me is important of giving up hope. What am I hoping for that is still keeping me into that situation, but will not come and accept?

Christopher Kabakis (49:44.748)
Hmm.

Christopher Kabakis (49:48.748)
Hmm.

Christopher Kabakis (49:56.139)
Hmm.

Constanze Buchheim (49:57.634)
that this hope will not be fulfilled. For me, that was the hardest part.

Christopher Kabakis (50:02.892)
I mean, that is, that's super interesting. That's kind of this, um, sometimes people say hope is not a strategy. Yes, it is. But I mean, the psychological kind of, no, dimension of that, that somehow if we have hope that we will be saved, no, mean, reality changing suddenly in a way, this is almost like the, uh, children's perspective, no. In this we encounter like a younger part in us that still hopes to be saved.

Constanze Buchheim (50:27.863)
Peace.

Christopher Kabakis (50:32.652)
And then only when we let go of this hope, we can actually take our own responsibility fully here as well. And this is a sign of maturity then. And so we get back to a mature leadership and to responsibility here as well. Very interesting.

Constanze Buchheim (50:49.002)
Exactly, because if you're still in the hope, you're not responsible. So it's really linked to that. The moment that you're saying it is like it is. What do I do now? How do I respond to that situation? Then you're getting into ownership. So if you're taking the responsibility for yourself, you're getting into ownership. This is why I said for me, that's there's a little difference.

Christopher Kabakis (51:04.982)
Mm-hmm.

Christopher Kabakis (51:08.928)
Mm-hmm.

Constanze Buchheim (51:19.086)
And every time I think this moment is magic, even though it's really, really, really hard. And I mean, I really could use that. That's the reason why I'm pointing this out because this aspect of giving up the hope helped me a lot during my last year's development because on regular time I'm asking myself, where do I still hope

hope something happens that's not gonna happen. And this helped me do most all of the change that happened during the last years and even heal some of my hardest childhoods, wounds, so to say. Yeah. Because like my second crisis was not that hard, but my second crisis was just

one and a half years away when I found myself filling a lot of roles, a lot of roles and responsibilities and positions, yeah, and really, really, really nice positions. And I felt that I'm running and running and running and that my fuel is like going down. Yeah. And I said, okay, why do I do this? Yeah. What is

pushing me to take all those responsibilities and all those roles. What is there? And then by looking at this and by asking my question, what do I hope for? I found that I'm still hoping for the recognition of my mother and father saying, you're doing such a good job.

And we are so happy that you are here. We are so proud of you. Actually, I was hoping for the word, I am so proud of you. Basically from my mother. And at some point when I realized that and by understanding my relationship with my mother and understanding my mother, yeah, I knew this is not gonna happen. This is not gonna happen. And it was such a...

Constanze Buchheim (53:42.606)
A sad moment was just a sad, really sad moment. Yeah. To realize that's not going to happen. but at the same moment I felt that from now on I can really decide what I'm doing and whatnot. Yeah. And that's always like this, you have both parts, in it. Yeah. And this is why I realized, giving up hope, where hope is not helpful anymore.

Christopher Kabakis (54:00.588)
Yeah.

Christopher Kabakis (54:10.124)
Mm.

Constanze Buchheim (54:12.554)
is really, really essential.

Christopher Kabakis (54:14.314)
And that's very interesting and very, I mean, deep and probably speaks to a lot of people listening and to me personally as well. I think it's very often the case that we are still acting out some old scripts from our childhood. So what motivates us in business and probably many entrepreneurs have that as well, is kind of indeed also in need of recognition, right? Sometimes also, I mean, safety. I want the money, so I'm safe. Or I want the money, so I'm autonomous.

or I want great success, then I will get recognition. And often it's kind of out of a lack of inner resourcing at that place. And so you actually hope still from practically getting the love or the pride, recognition from your father or your mother, right? So to kind of, and how to get to it, to ask yourself this question, as you pointed out. So what I'm still hoping here for to happen. kind of this kind of

to be safe by something from the outside. And to then, like, it sounds a bit like Stark when you said like, so let go of all hope, like the hope destroying, hope busting kind of, conseliere. But I mean, on the other side of this actually, weights a new form of inner freedom. mean, and autonomy. So that allows you to take by choice.

Constanze Buchheim (55:29.294)
Thank you.

Christopher Kabakis (55:42.124)
ownership and responsibility and not be like just enmeshed in some old programming in a way, right? So I think this has many applications and is very useful for all of us to really look at this.

Constanze Buchheim (55:49.386)
and executive.

Constanze Buchheim (55:56.366)
And you know what is the most interesting thing? I can remember that this actually happened last year in November. that's kind of, it's not too old, that experience and the insights. And I had to get older than 40 to have those thoughts.

Christopher Kabakis (56:15.19)
Mm-hmm.

Constanze Buchheim (56:23.38)
And I can remember it was a day in November last year when I had that thought. And by coincidence, on the next weekend, we visited my parents. And during the week, I had this moment where I gave up hope and then we visited my parents. And at that weekend, at that visit, it was the first time that my mother

was talking to me in the way I always wished for.

So the moment I had given up hope was kind of the signal or the impulse the system needed to change something. And I think that's so powerful to have that small but really big thing at the same time in mind. And this helped me a lot in opening up then this experience.

Christopher Kabakis (57:04.884)
Uh-huh.

Christopher Kabakis (57:19.456)
Yeah, this is so crazy how this works systemically, you say, unconsciously. Sometimes we, we, we effort so much in wanting to change other people, right? Especially those closest to us. And once we give up, because something in us has shifted, we have clarified something inside of ourselves, for integrated something.

Suddenly the system shifts. wanted the whole time we were fighting for 40 years to get something, the pride of the mother, the love of the father, whatever. And suddenly when we give up all hope, we get it. I mean, this is a paradoxical how this works systemically. So, mean, this is built on what we believe also at Evolut Institute that actually the real change starts always within and from within. And when we change, then the systems.

Constanze Buchheim (57:56.994)
Yeah.

Christopher Kabakis (58:10.678)
can change. So, I mean, on the personal level, but also on an organizational level or on a societal level. And I think your example is great.

Constanze Buchheim (58:11.949)
Mm-hmm.

Constanze Buchheim (58:18.35)
And then talking in the concept that I introduced, if I change something in my space, I will change the things that I put into our space that we share. So the space between us changes. And if the other one is interested in creating that space, that relationship as well.

he or she will realize there's a change. And then this will be an impulse for them to think about themselves and saying, okay, something changed. What can I do to react on that change? And then they put something different into this common space that's in between us. And this is why I love this concept of those spaces or rooms, as I said, because

It's not that esoteric anymore. If I'm looking at it like that, yeah, it's just a matter of fact, it's systemic.

Christopher Kabakis (59:25.868)
Yeah, that's all very interesting. so we have completed almost like an hour now of conversation. And often I ask like, is there a piece of advice you would give like people who are struggling with transition moments or crisis moments or being at crossroads?

And or giving advice to, mean, a younger version of yourself also. But I hope it, I mean, almost like we have carved it out as part of the conversation very clearly. And I don't know, maybe you want to say it. Is it just like give up hope? So an easy advice is give up hope and everything will develop wonderfully after that. How would you think about giving advice to a younger version of yourself or?

to someone else who's struggling, facing a crisis moment or something.

Constanze Buchheim (01:00:25.25)
Yeah, I would never ever say give up hope. This would not be my advice because I believe that at some points of time, it's good to have some hope. And it's also reasonable to have some hope because there is a likelihood that it's coming. What I'm saying is give up hope.

Christopher Kabakis (01:00:29.484)
Yeah

Constanze Buchheim (01:00:54.776)
when the likelihood of the event is zero. This is basically what I'm saying, but that's not my advice. The advice I would give to my younger self is trust the process. It happens when it happens and everything that's meant for you will come to you and trust it.

Christopher Kabakis (01:01:02.667)
Mm-hmm.

Constanze Buchheim (01:01:24.066)
Like this trust would have saved me a lot of anxiety and fears and fighting and a lot of pain. That's just not needed if you trust. And what I would also give to my younger self is be gentle with yourself in that process.

because I had been really, really, really, really hard to myself, really unnecessary hard. And this is what I would give to my younger self, but at the same time, my brain is saying, yeah, but my younger self would not listen because you cannot experience it or you cannot feel it without like really experiencing it.

And if you would ask me someone who is struggling, what's my advice to them? I would really say, think about acceptance. Think about acceptance. So really ask yourself the questions, what do I have to accept that I'm not accepting yet?

Why am I fighting something that's already true? This is, from my perspective, what change is all about and what healing is all about and what resilience also is about. Because I realized, and this was another shift,

I realized that for a lot of years I was fighting the negative emotions. And I said, I want to avoid anger. I want to avoid anxiety. I want to avoid like all the negative emotions because they are not giving me a good feeling, of course. And there was, and I can always really remember the situations when I had been there. There was a moment when I,

Constanze Buchheim (01:03:52.814)
I had been in my sabbatical and I read all my diaries and my thoughts from the last years that I had been writing. And I realized that fighting of negative emotions and at that point of time I was like, yeah, but that's life too. And feeling a positive emotion gives me the feeling of being alive and feeling a negative emotion gives me the feeling of being alive as well. And for me,

connection was always important. And what I realized is that no matter what the emotion is, any kind of emotion is part of the game and is helping me to connect because if someone is really sad and I can feel his or her grief and step into that point to my grief and we are in grief together.

that something really, really, really, really connecting. I'm not saying we should do it all the time, yeah, but I'm saying there's everything I ever hoped for in this connection, yeah, that can also arise from a negative emotion. And that was the moment of time when I said, okay, except that every emotion is part of the game. And that changed everything for me.

Christopher Kabakis (01:05:21.339)
Yeah, but might even go as far as to say it's the framing of emotions as negative or positive is probably part of the issue. And as you said, like unpleasant emotions kind of don't feel good. That's actually what we often then avoid. But it can be very beneficial, especially when we bring this into a shared space. So if we feel the emotion together, as you said, and I mean, in our work, of course, I mean, you know, the work we do at the Evalu.institute, it's...

Constanze Buchheim (01:05:27.661)
Mm-hmm.

Christopher Kabakis (01:05:49.259)
This movement towards acceptance is a crucial one. And then finding solace, comfort and new energy in this shared emotional space. And it's very important for people's processes to be able to move forward to develop into new spaces. Because often in these...

places, we are alone. So we hold the emotions alone. That's why actually we can't accept them, want to get away from them. Because yeah, we, it's hard for us to trust enough to bring it into relationality, into relationship. And if we allow this in the right conditions, the right space, the right support, then this will move a lot and help us with everything that we discussed today, the positive effects of acceptance then.

And building more maturity personally and in our leadership roles. That can be very powerful. Yeah, very nice. I was also just joking and provoking you a bit when I said, like, what do you tell people? Give up hope? No, mean, of course not. So trust the process and move towards acceptance. think those are very valuable pieces of advice. And together with our kind of

Constanze Buchheim (01:07:11.947)
Mm-hmm.

Christopher Kabakis (01:07:14.828)
conversation about responsibility, ownership, and so on. think we have like really touched a of interesting ground today and we could like talk on for hours, I think, but maybe we wrap it up now. Is there anything that you feel that wasn't mentioned, but that would be really valuable to add to our conversation to make it, as we say in German, more round? So to come to make, us a feeling of completion. Is there anything that you would like to mention?

and

Constanze Buchheim (01:07:46.233)
Actually, I think we've touched a lot of the things. would really end with a strong, what is the word, plädoyer, for understanding the power of emotions. I think we talked about it and for me it's such a

Christopher Kabakis (01:08:06.412)
appeal to, I don't know, yeah.

Constanze Buchheim (01:08:18.318)
pity that we're still in this mode of emotions have nothing to do in business. And I think that is not leading us to where we need to go because we are humans. There are always emotions and understanding the messages, understanding the dynamics.

and integrating those dynamics into every dimension of our life, including business, is a potential that is untapped from my perspective.

Christopher Kabakis (01:09:04.3)
I'll to that.

Nothing to add. would say if people wonder how can they get in touch with you? How can they learn more about you and your work? Where should they go to? Where would you point them?

Constanze Buchheim (01:09:26.798)
Definitely to my LinkedIn page. So you can find me on LinkedIn and I have all the relevant content pieces linked there and I'm pretty active there. So if you want to get in contact, LinkedIn is the best way.

Christopher Kabakis (01:09:31.66)
Mm-hmm.

Christopher Kabakis (01:09:47.629)
Otherwise we mentioned, of course, i-potentials, not high potentials, but i-potentials, exactly the company as well, if you're looking for an executive, I guess. course. Yeah, that was wonderful. Thank you very much. I'm contented for sharing your insight, your wisdom, also your personal path and experiences.

Constanze Buchheim (01:09:57.166)
Of course, yeah, that would be great indeed.

Christopher Kabakis (01:10:17.228)
I was touched and learned a lot and I hope our audience as well. And I think we will have to continue the conversation. There are so many things we did not touch, we could have touched. So I think there will be a round two at some point.

Constanze Buchheim (01:10:33.112)
We will, we will. It was my pleasure. Thank you very much.

Christopher Kabakis (01:10:37.11)
Thank you, Kansate. Have a good day. Bye bye.

Constanze Buchheim (01:10:40.408)
Hi.

