Dmitrij Achelrod (00:00)
Jeremy, thank you so much for joining us It's a pleasure to have you.

Jeremy Lent (00:05)
Yeah, I'm looking forward to the conversation, Dmitrij. Thanks so much for inviting me.

Dmitrij Achelrod (00:09)
actually it's not our first encounter, but I think it was more or less five years ago when I participated in your course, Deep Transformation, which was a wonderful course and led to many, I would say, seismic shifts on how I looked at the world. so ⁓ you're still doing that course?

Jeremy Lent (00:26)
That's great to hear. Yeah, thank you.

Yeah, well, I've put it on pause for right now just because I've been focusing so much of my time on this new book and getting that launched. And I'll probably offer basically a whole different course maybe beginning next year, really, on this new book that is coming out in May. Yeah.

Dmitrij Achelrod (00:45)
Wow, very exciting. And we will try also to talk about your book and the ideas you are bringing forward in it. But maybe let's start with a topic that I think leaves many people, me included, sometimes cynical, sad, confused. And it's really the topic about the state of our world. And what I mean by the state,

of our world, I'm referring to the overarching condition that we find ourselves in, ⁓ in an economic system that just doesn't seem to work any longer or doesn't seem to produce the outcomes most people are actually hoping or wishing for. We have massive destructions in biodiversity. People are speaking about the sixth great Mars extinction.

You actually wrote in one of your newsletters recently that by 2050, we will have more plastics in the ocean than actual fish, which is just mind boggling. What is your take on where we are and what is broken about the system?

Jeremy Lent (01:43)
Thanks.

Yeah, well, know, this is a system that is really bent on self-destruction. And I think in this century, we are at these kind of final stages of really a process that's been going on for pretty much around 500 years, ever since the rise of early modern Europe, say like the 17th century onwards.

a of a simple but a deep way to look at this system is to look at the underlying worldview that gave rise to the system. And it's one that actually came from that period of early modern Europe. And it's really a worldview that was with the scientific revolution, which had all kinds of wonderful things for our understanding of life and for the quality, for the material quality of our lives in so many ways.

This is certainly not to criticize that incredible breakthrough and understanding. But it was also based on a view of the world as basically like a machine. It was the sense that humans are fundamentally separate from the world. And the world is really just a machine to be understood. And there was this idea of conquering nature. Francis Bacon was the one who was like the sort of prophet of that notion.

But everyone around the time, all the great scientists who were part of this way of thinking, whether Descartes or Galileo whatever, had the same sort of notion that understands how the basic functions of this incredible machine of nature worked and humans can do all kinds of wonderful things, which we have done over those hundreds of years. But by seeing nature as a machine, as a resource to be exploited.

we have led on this path that has led to this untrammeled destruction, like a total success in exploitation and extraction from nature. But at the same time, it's led to this so much so that it's like destroying the life systems itself that we are part of. And at the same time as that whole system of extraction and exploitation of nature took over, there's also a sense

of exploiting other people. So those white Christian Europeans that came up with these ideas saw themselves as somehow innately superior to all other human beings. And they justified colonialism, as a sort of bringing the light of their understanding to the rest of the world while they basically implanted mass genocides and destructions of culture and 500 years of exploitation and oppression that we've had since then.

You know, you were just saying that like the people we look right now, we say, well, this system is so obviously broken. But actually what I've came to realize sort of as I was doing the research for this new book I've written about a different kind of system. Actually, the system is not broken. Actually, the system is doing exactly what it was intended to do. It's a system that is basically intended to exploit others, including other people, and extract

as much energy and everything that is valuable out of what is seen as resources of the living earth. And been doing that so well that it is about to destroy its host. It's a little bit like a malignancy, like a cancer that has been super successful. It's basically destroying the host that it arose on. But of course, we all know the end point of it is that the end point is going to

be death for the host and for the cancer itself because it's relying on that host to live on. And that's what we're experiencing right now. So that's why once we understand that more deeply, we get to see that we're not going to fix things by trying to make things a bit better somehow. Like, recognize this is going wrong. We need to fix that. This is going wrong. We need to fix that. That's not to say we shouldn't, obviously, in the short term, incrementally try to.

make things better when we see them wrong. But that is not going to actually change the direction we're going on because the system itself basically takes even the best fixes. In fact, the better the solutions are, the more the system will take that and turn that into another instrument of exploitation and extraction.

Dmitrij Achelrod (06:16)
Mmm, wow.

So if I hear correctly, you're basically saying, all the environmental destruction, the climate change, and also the suffering of all different forms of life are not accidental, but they're actually caused by design of the system, which has an inherently exploitative logic. But then if there is exploitation on the one end, I assume

Jeremy Lent (06:36)
Yes.

Dmitrij Achelrod (06:46)
there is also another end which kind of receives the benefits.

Jeremy Lent (06:52)
Yes, that's right. That's a great point. And so that's worth taking a closer look at that. And it's valid to say, well, many of us have received great benefits of the system over the last few hundred years. And there's no question. And some people have studied this and made that their primary message. People like Steven Pinker is probably the best example. Somebody else called Hans.

but Rustling, who also put similar ideas out. And there's a truth to that logic that materially, in almost every which way you look at it, including the most fundamental things like things like child and infant mortality or longevity or overall health, as well as things like ability to just access basic things like light.

materials, all kinds of things, there's been massive improvements over the last hundreds of years. No question about that. And there's a couple of things to note, though. One is most of those improvements have come around not so much from the system of exploitation and extraction, but actually from our scientific understanding and ways in which those can be used.

in beneficial ways for humans without necessarily destroying the earth at the same time. So that's kind of one thing to sort of explore a little bit more deeply. But maybe a deeper point about that is that if you look at the actual who is really getting the benefits of the system and who are getting exploited, what you see is a very, it's what has been aptly called a wealth pump that essentially most of the value that is being sucked out of the earth.

Most of the value that's being sucked out of humans who have to give their blood, sweat, and tears for the vast bulk of their life's energy and spirit into selling their hours for an employer and for whoever owns the resources that is buying that labor. Most of that wealth is getting sucked into a smaller and smaller tiny elite.

the Occupy movement used to talk about the 1%. Nowadays, it's also equally important to look at the 0.1%. And like the tiny, tiny group of people who are amassing billions of dollars and hundreds of billions of dollars of wealth and power as a result of the system that sucks everything out and pulls it up to a smaller and smaller group of people.

That is the system that we live in. Now, many people who find themselves in the middle of that system might get some benefits from that wealth pump themselves. And that's especially true of people who live in the global north. And there's a key issue to look at around that because once we begin to understand what the system's actually doing, those of us who are in a place of economic, cultural, material privilege, such as I definitely am and...

you might be in many people listen to this podcast. It opens up a kind of moral inquiry because then you have to start saying, well, if I'm a beneficiary of that, who are the people who are actually not you are getting the wealth sucked from them as an in order to let me be a beneficiary. And if that's the case, if I look at this and I can see that there is a moral outrage being performed.

What can I do around that? Because that privilege brings a certain empowerment, which gives us a moral choice whether we want to act on that system, not saying that we should immediately feel guilt for the fact that we have been born into a certain place of privilege. But once we're aware of it, there is a certain moral imperative to do something about it.

Dmitrij Achelrod (10:37)
And so you told us some of the Pinkarian arguments, so to speak, right? We have massive ⁓ increase in life expectancy, material wealth. So many people dragged out of poverty, right? And I think that there are a lot of reasons to say, well, it's not so black and white. And how you measure poverty defines how many people are in poverty and people who before

weren't forming part of the financial system. And suddenly we're kind of pulled into the more regulated labor markets suddenly were counted as not poor any longer, but they were uprooted from often from their local communities put into slums somewhere in the global South. And then we said, well, they're out of poverty now. But maybe what I want to say with that argument is, you know, many people would argue, you know, Jeremy,

Yeah, the system is not perfect, but it's probably the best we've had so far. And the classical argument is we've tried communism and it's spectacularly failed. And the current system that we have is the system that brought us prosperity and peace that they claim was unprecedented in history.

Jeremy Lent (11:54)
Yes, and that's what the claim is. And that claim, by the way, has been promulgated so powerfully that ⁓ most people would say, that's obviously must be true because everyone keeps saying it. And that's actually something that's worth exploring a little bit about. It's concept of what's known as cultural hegemony, which is really the recognition. was actually a

Italian philosopher Antonio Gramsci, who first talked about that in 1930s, what happens is when you have a power structure, the elite at the very top of it are served by this whole array of cultural thought leaders, intellectuals, people like lawyers, accountants, the whole array of professionals who go around saying this is the very best system.

And the way cultural hegemony works is by creating a consensus trance that this is the best system. You don't have to enforce it on people who are getting exploited. But in fact, even the very people who getting exploited support it because they're told that this is actually the best thing for them too. So that's a lot of what we see. And clearly one important thing is just to

always whenever you have some statement about we are doing better or this is helping us, whatever, to really ask this question, who is the we, who is the us? right now, there are something like three billion people in the world, a very, very large chunk of humanity who earn less money than is required to allow a child to get enough nutrition.

that they can expect along a normal, healthy life ahead of them. Now, that is happening when just a busload of people in the world own roughly as much wealth as half of the entire world's population, essentially all of those people I just described. And that is a moral outrage. And that's the kind of thing that there's no justification to say well, maybe this kind of system

was the best system we had. It might be the best system for a small group of people, but not for the bulk. But the point is that to just look at the sort of 20th century as this clash of two essentially like on the one side or communism on the other, and to think that that is all we have as the only two options is, I think, a fundamental sort of like a category error.

And that's actually a lot of what this new book I've written on the vision of eco-civilization looks at. That when you sort of think in terms of that either or, then it's easy to justify, well, communism failed. And OK, that's the system we have. But there's another way of organizing the world that is available to us. And you can only really understand that once you realize what both of those two different systems, capitalism and communism,

had in common, they both ultimately agreed on this notion of extracting from the natural world as much as possible. And communism, no more than capitalism, ever questioned the notion of extract and the only real difference was one said the state should organize that extraction. One said it should be done by private enterprise and private capital.

And then the other thing they both had in common is they both refused to accept the dignity of ordinary people to make their own path of what actually works for them and actually make their own self-determinations. So under capitalism, you had the system saying, let the markets decide, which ultimately means let capital decide because markets are driven by where the capital is.

⁓ concentrated, which ultimately means let the billionaires and the wealthy elite and the wealthy power elite decide what other people should have. And the other system said, let the state decide, which then moved out very almost automatically inevitably to corruption and the same kind of centralization of power away from ordinary people. So what we need to do is look at systems that actually by design

empower ordinary people collectively in groups to determine what is best for them. And that might seem utopian from people who aren't looking closely because it seems so far away from what we actually, see around us for the most part. But it's actually not at all. It's part of what we as humans have naturally done ever since we evolved on this earth and is in fact

shown in all different aspects of what we see around the world to be really probably the best way to design systems for human flourishing.

Dmitrij Achelrod (16:41)
So before we step into the solution space, you already outlined parts of it, I wanted to get back to this situation we are in right now. maybe one group of people says, look, ⁓ it's the only or the best system we have, right? And you already answered to that. And then there might be a lot of people who are able to see

the clear design errors in the system, right? Who say, look, yeah, I see the harm it is causing. I see the suffering that ensues out of the system. But, um, what shall I really do about I quit my job and, go off grid or what can I do about it in the sense of

I want to ensure that my family has a decent life, right? Which means that we don't need to struggle to get food and education. And somehow, and this counts also for me, this fear of descending the social ladder, of kind of being, of drifting into poverty keeps.

I think me and many people in line in the sense of, know, keep doing your job because if you don't, you will lose in the system. Right. And so somehow the sentiment is even if I don't like the system, I need to play by its rules because I'm not in the position to change it. And system change happens over decades. Right. It happens organically and most of the time slowly, unless we talk about a sudden collapse,

I can sacrifice myself by saying, I'm out of here, but it won't change the system and somebody else will step into my shoes and do the same thing. what would you tell to these people and to me?

Jeremy Lent (18:26)
⁓ Yeah, these are complex questions. I'm glad you're going there. yeah, and there's sort of multiple layers around that. So let's just explore it a little bit in a few different places. One is, yeah, we all are in this place where because we're born into this system, whether we're privileged or not, we still actually are sort of sucked into being sort of cogs in the wheel of that system. And it's designed.

to force that. It's designed so that we either have to play the game or we suffer from that in terms of social status, economic status, and ultimately we've got to find some way to be involved in it in that way. And from my own personal experience, the only reason I have the luxury right now in my life to be able to spend this time looking at the system and putting my own energy into trying to change it.

is because financially I was part of that system in an earlier part of my life and by the time I left it had enough saved up that I could afford to put my energy in that space. So I'm certainly not claiming that I'm above that kind of set of trade-offs that we all need to look at. So I do think that's really important and something that there's no simple answer to.

there are some extreme elements of that. In terms of like the, I quit my job type of thing? Usually the answer would be no. But if you actually had been signed up by Palantir, for example, to develop AI, to basically be part of creating what might be the most dystopian surveillance authoritarian future we have, then I'd say yes, definitely quit your job.

and find some way to take those skills in a way that is more beneficial. So there are times when even that might be a true statement. For the most part, though, we do need to make trade-offs. I think it's very important to understand, though, where we are working. And if we are actually part of a system that is truly doing harm, then there might be a valid intention to set to actually see if it's possible to take your skills

and use them in part of a more beneficial way. But ultimately, I think we've got to understand that it's not really true that none of us gets to change the system. In fact, all of us are part of the system. even the relatively small decisions we make and small choices we make are actually part of changing that system. And this is really a lot of what my own

work in complex systems and understanding led to recognize is that we're not separate from the system. We're part of it. And the system itself is this incredibly complex, non-linear, self-organized thing where once we recognize we are part of doing that, we can actually begin to be more of a force towards those beneficial futures. It can start within ourselves in terms of how we relate to the different drives within ourselves.

how we relate to others around us, how we relate to social systems in general. And ultimately, there is a spectrum of short-term decisions. not saying most people don't necessarily go out and quit your job next week. You've got families, you've got responsibilities to look at. But there are intentions that you can set. And if somebody does recognize they're part of some corporation that ultimately is

an embedded part of what ⁓ we just known as structural violence, actually an active part of creating the oppression that's causing the world right now and the destruction of life on earth the way we see it, then there is a very valid path to say, maybe over the next few years I can reorient what I'm doing to find something that is less harmful.

and maybe even actually working towards the kind of system change we need to something that's more life-affirming. So I think that's an option available to all of us, just on different timeframes and different scales.

Dmitrij Achelrod (22:35)
Hmm. I want to get back to one of the things I said in the beginning of your argument that you said, well, you you are in the position to think about these things because at some point you have been part of the system. And you were, as you call it, you were in the belly of the machine. Maybe you can share with us a little bit.

Jeremy Lent (22:57)
Yeah, that's right.

Dmitrij Achelrod (23:03)
period when you were part of the game, when you were contributing basically to the the to craze of the system and what happened that made you reconsider fundamentally your choice, your life.

Jeremy Lent (23:18)
Yeah.

Yeah. I mean, thank you for asking that. And I think it is helpful. It's helpful for all of us to share our personal experiences with others, because we can all learn together collectively from each other's paths. well, for me, I grew up in England. And when I was a student in Cambridge, I basically had all the same views that I'm espousing right now, in fact.

which is kind of ironic, because then I came to the United States very early in my life. because of certain circumstances, it me to completely change the direction I moved in. And I found myself getting an MBA at the University of Chicago, which now we know as the center of neoliberal thinking, Milton Friedman and all those people. I knew nothing about that.

time. But I ended up going into management consulting and I was trying to like care for my family exactly like you were just describing, people do. And ended up being part of the dot com boom right back when the internet first started in the 1990s. And I was by circumstance or whatever it was, I ended up creating

The first internet company that allowed people to apply for credit cards online, get approved in real time. So exciting. Ended up, got venture capital funding, took the company public. And I was chairman and CEO of this company. It was a super exciting experience. But what's interesting when I look back on that time, the irony is it was doing everything that I now look at and see as exploitive, extractive and destructive of people's lives.

So I hold that and accept that. But what was interesting is at the time, I could justify it to myself by not looking at those deeper layers. Nobody forced me to. And it takes real investigation to even notice that they're there. But I could say, it's great. We're helping people get what they want by giving credit to people, making it easy for them. And it makes their lives that little bit better. So we're doing a good thing for people. we're sort of doing well by doing good.

which is this great concept that ⁓ this writer called Anand Giridharadas writes out, like this kind of hypocrisy that is implicit in a lot of what people do to justify their actions. So it kind of helps for me now to look at the way I was able to justify that to myself and others around me at the time. But in my personal life, things crashed for me. My wife at the time who passed away some years back got very sick and

I left the company to look after her, but it was too early in the company's trajectory. Within a year or two, the company itself collapsed. And I found myself personally in this place of really deep investigation. It was almost like a meltdown of my life. And I was asking myself, what can I do with my life going forward? It was still ⁓ relatively early in my life. What could I do that was truly meaningful?

Because I began, I sort of realized that I had been looking for meaning externally rather than coming from someplace I could really believe in. So that led to this really deep investigation. And it was both an intellectual investigation, like where does meaning come from? Tons of reading led to that book, The Patterning Instinct, A Cultural History of Humanity's Search for Meaning, which really looked at the way different cultures have made meaning out of the universe from early on gatherer times to the present.

And it involves all kinds of studies like cognitive science and history and anthropology and evolutionary biology to try to make sense of all that. And it led me to an embodied investigation. whatever I would find that was meaningful, I wanted it to make sure it was meaningful not just to my mind sort of making sense of it intellectually, but heart and spirit.

fact, part of my question is, what is that? What is the spirit? And so I discovered practices like meditation and qigong and different other embodied practices, which have become fundamental to my life ever since. And it was from that kind of exploration I wrote this follow-on book called The Web of Meaning, Integrating Science and Traditional Wisdom to Find Our Place in the Universe.

But that whole journey of discovery, it was really kind of forced on me by a crash in my life. And I often wonder, would I have even been in this place I'm in right now if that hadn't happened? But as I look back on it now, I feel it was a blessing for me in my life that I was forced to look at these questions.

Dmitrij Achelrod (28:06)
Thank you for sharing the story, Jeremy. And I think it's remarkable that you can look back at that and say it was a blessing because I'm sure at that time it felt like life's ending, right? mean, and it has to certain, and it has to certain extent, right? I mean, like your old life has ended and

Jeremy Lent (28:18)
Absolutely, yeah, exactly. That's right,

so even though I can look at it it's a blessing, I would never have wished it on myself or others. I would wish some other more gentle path for that discovery to take place. So it's a very tricky question,

Dmitrij Achelrod (28:30)
Hmm.

Yeah.

and ⁓

Just maybe one more question about that, because when I talk to people, a lot of them say, look, Dmitrij, I hear you, I see you, I share the main concerns, but first let me win in this system. Let me exit and then I can lean back and try changing the system. But if I don't have any means or if I have to struggle for my survival,

can I help if I can't even help myself? That's kind of the common argument, but I understand it at the same time I feel like it keeps you inside.

Jeremy Lent (29:08)
Yes, that's right. Yeah.

You know,

know, Dmitrij, this is such an important point. I'm really glad you're just kind of probing this a bit more deeply. And there is this movement that you might be referring to implicitly in what you're saying of effective altruism, which basically looks, it kind of starts from a diagnosis similar to what I talked about. It says, yeah, the system is bad. But the best way to infect the system

the most effective way is to create wealth and then just do it with a good intention and make sure that when you get to that place of wealth, you use it in a really good way. The problem with that, well, there's a couple of problems with that, but one problem with that is it does kind of require, in a way, almost like a sort of an assumption of incorruptibility. And one of the...

realities of human nature or whatever is that once people get to experience greater levels of wealth and comfort and power, then it's very difficult to let go of that. And so what tends to happen is you keep going, yeah, I'll do really good, but let me just, know 10 million, well, that's not quite enough, but if I get it to 50 million, then I can really do, well, 50, well.

Imagine how much good I could do if I had 100 million. Imagine how much. And so it keeps going on and on until you end up being part of the system The other issue is that in making those funds, if you are successful in doing that, to look at all these structural violence, all these systemic harm, those actions have done. Essentially, what you're doing is being part of that wealth pump I described earlier. So it's a little bit like, well, you're

you're sort building up a big liability on the balance sheet, on the moral balance sheet sort of thing. So maybe there's better ways to work at it. So I think a lot of that approach can be self-serving. And having said that, just kind of want to point out that in a way that was the trajectory my own life took. But I think that in my case, it was a rarity. And most cases, what ends up happening is

You don't get forced to sort of break out of the system by something happening like what happened to me, but you sort of get embedded in the system. And oftentimes you may not even get to the point where you end up earning so much, you even have that choice, but you find, well, you've got a spouse, you got kids, and suddenly you realize you're kind of stuck there. And you can really then find decades later, you look back in your life and say, things didn't work, I didn't take the path.

that I really felt was the right one, even though I thought that was it. So these are really big questions to ask when you're looking at those kind of life path options available to you.

Dmitrij Achelrod (32:11)
Yeah, true and very deep, yeah, deep reflections you're sharing with us on this one, especially really when we look at our own doings and the collateral damage that we cause with our professions or work. Yeah, it's easier to look away. But what I wanted to continue on and take up the thread is really

Jeremy Lent (32:24)
Yes.

Dmitrij Achelrod (32:35)
this point when

part of your life collapsed and then you were looking for a new meaning and you started digging into history and looking at, how did civilizations of people construct meaning and that there were alternatives, alternative ways of kind of constructing a good life.

than what we imagine, Can you give us an example of what other cultures maybe found meaningful and helpful and how they looked at human thriving?

Jeremy Lent (33:11)
Yeah, well, you know, maybe a good place to begin with is actually from the Western tradition, even though my work actually looks allotted in the East Asian traditions and such ⁓ as Buddhism or Daoism or others. But actually, Aristotle was somebody who drew a very, important distinction, who looking at the question of flourishing.

or you could almost define it as happiness between what he called eudaimonia and hedonia. And this is crucial because it really affects our understanding of what it really means to flourish. So the notion of hedonia, a little bit as the word, the translation in English of hedonism, as that implies, is it's the sort of

short term or superficial happiness that comes from external experiences. So it's the kind of happiness that comes from physical pleasure or comforts or whatever the things like may be like that. But hedonia for Aristotle was something a little bit deeper. It was more like you could get hedonia from sense like being respected by people or just from having status or you could get it by feeling safe and having

wealth So it was basically kind of external sources of feeling good in yourself. Eudaimonia is something fundamentally different. And it was about really what it was like when you were on your path to truly fulfill your own internal destiny or your own internal true nature of who you are as a person. And Aristotle applied this not just to humans, but any living entity.

with a tree or a fly or an animal could also experience eudaimonia if they were able to fully become what, I mean, he didn't obviously have the biological ideas of DNA or those things that came much later, but he had the essence of that idea. What was the intrinsic nature that had evolved for you to be who you are? And what did it mean to really fully manifest that in your life?

And the path of fully manifesting your true nature is a path of eudaimonia. And the reason why that's actually so important in today's world is because our entire system of consumer capitalism requires on not having you experience eudaimonia. Cause if you have eudaimonia, you actually don't need to go out and buy the next status object or the fancier car or go on the fancy vacation and all that stuff.

because you might be perfectly satisfied with a really simple life and spend your time on things that don't necessarily add to GDP when you're doing it. some of the early movers of consumer capitalism were very clear about this. They would say specifically, we have to keep people feeling perpetually dissatisfied so that they are always looking for that next thing. And that way we'll be able to sell them more.

So it was explicitly driven into the DNA of our culture today, is the drive to keep people on what's known as the hedonic treadmill. And that very notion, that distinction between eudaimonia and hedonia, applies very, very closely correlated to the Buddhist notion of dukkha. And in Buddhism, the concept of dukkha, very similar to hedonia,

but it's the sense of needing more, not being satisfied with. Oftentimes we translate dukkha as this meaning suffering, but it's sort of true, but it's a certain, it's not just suffering like pain or like really feeling miserable, but it's a deeper, more subtle notion of suffering where no matter what happens, you can't be fully satisfied because that satisfaction has to come from deeply within. And there's a...

and sort of contrasting notion in Buddhism that's actually very analogous to that notion of eudaimonia and but it's called Sukha and Sukha in contrast to Dukkha is that sense of well-being, sense of very very deep well-being that comes out from really being in touch with what you know is your true nature and the sense of like

you don't need to accomplish something. You don't need to make that happen because just the way you are right now is absolutely perfect in its own way. Like that recognition is known as sukha. So it's very interesting how both in East Asian and early Western thinking, that same distinction arises. And you see it really that notion of sukkha or that notion of eudaimonia.

you see in many different cultures around the world. Indigenous cultures oftentimes, very important aspect of that is recognizing that truly being who you are is not an individual experience, but it's one that you experience in relation with others, like as humans, we're deeply, deeply relational. And so in sub-Saharan Africa, there is this  core concept, also related, and it's almost like a cousin concept to these ones are describing of Ubuntu.

which basically translates as I am, and you are, therefore I am, or I am, therefore you are. our existence itself arises from our relationality with others. So that's also a core way of exploring how we can really find that true fulfillment.

Dmitrij Achelrod (38:47)
Beautiful answer. Thank you for that. you have portrayed where true sources for fulfillment and meaning can come from. And how can we build also on a societal level or a systemic level systems that

respect these principles and where these principles actually kind of influence the system, right? And that is probably also a question you thought about in your new book. ⁓

Jeremy Lent (39:20)
Yes, that's

exactly right, Dmitrij. And that's a great pair of points to follow on from the discussion we've been having. And really, is where I came to in my own investigation of these things. In the book I wrote called The Web of Meaning that we talking about earlier, it looked at what would a worldview of deep interconnectedness look like that did integrate the best understandings of science and

the great insights from traditional wisdom. And that book ended up with this vision of if we sort of start from that worldview of deep interconnectedness, what would a society look like that was built on that foundation rather than built on one of separation, the way our dominant society is right now? And that led me to this vision of an ecological civilization, the idea of recognizing that

What would need to be transformed is not just one element like our economic system or something, but every aspect of what we call civilization, everything from education to law and governance to economics definitely and business, and also like how we grow food and technology, everything. And looking at that ecological word got me inspired because it's recognizing that we can take some of the principles from life itself.

and also from humans own evolved needs, as we evolved as a particular species on the earth over millions of years, rather than what we think is natural based on the system we're born into right now. so in a way, this book I've just written, which is coming out in May, is called Eco-Civilization, Making a World That Works for All.

And it really tries to answer exactly your question, what these systems would look like. And the first place to begin is to recognize that it has to be a fundamentally different system. So that first thing we were saying when we started this conversation has to start from the recognition this current system isn't broken. It's doing exactly what it was intended to do. And therefore, what would a different system look like? And the book really explores, if we had a system that really sets the conditions

for all beings to flourish, like that eudaimonia kind of flourishing on a regenerated earth, how would it look? And I spent the last five years researching this. what I discovered to my great delight really was that in every aspect of what we call civilization, people have already done the work to come up with these ideas. In some cases, they're brilliant ideas of what's possible. In other cases, in most cases,

people already living and acting and working on the ground in ways that do prefigure what that different kind of system could look like. So this is not a vision of a utopia, like, wouldn't it be lovely if that were true, but it'll never happen kind of thing. Quite the opposite. It's a sense of what is actually doable and workable, feasible and practical for human beings in a far more realistic way than our current system, which is based on unrealism, if you will, and is actually doable.

So some of the concepts we look at, for example, is we can structure businesses not based on entrepreneurs owning the business and then taking the public, sort of like the way I did in the ⁓ experience I told you about earlier, but you can actually build businesses cooperatively. There are great examples of very successful, big scale co-ops like Mondragon in the Basque country in Spain and a whole region, Emilia, Romania in

Northern Italy, which is based primarily on co-ops rather than on privately owned corporations as a way to make life work. That's sort of one thing to look at. There's a whole different way we can organize ourselves according to what's known as the commons, which if you think of something like say Wikipedia, is a perfect example of a commons based enterprise. Wikipedia is not owned by Google or Facebook and it got started not

by somebody saying, I want to be the next billionaire, but by somebody empowering people, putting the structures in place for people to actually care and work together to self-organize into creating one of the greatest, most beautiful tools that we've created using the internet of this kind of access to knowledge is freely available to all and managed by ourselves to actually be accurate

and successful. That's an example of the commons actually working. And that could work all around. It can work in things like platform cooperatives. Like we don't have to have Uber or Lyft sucking, again, like the wealth pump, billions and billions of dollars from each person who's working to actually give a ride. It's a great idea to use the internet to allow people to find people who want to drive them. but why should

30 to 40 % of all that wealth is created, then gets sucked into the hands of a few entrepreneurs. What happens if you create a a ⁓ cooperative system where the wealth that actually does accrue from that applies to the very people, the drivers who are doing the work, where they have to have control over their destiny. That can apply in all different aspects of the world. These are the kind of ideas that the book lays out in more detail.

Dmitrij Achelrod (44:41)
Hmm. It's very interesting. I think these are beautiful concepts. And at the same time, my brain is signaling me, but wait, I mean, isn't there so much systemic resistance to these concepts, right? So the structures of power, why would they ever say, sure, we will give away our surplus?

And also, maybe this is the first point, right? How would you overcome these structural resistance and this path dependency that we are on? This is the first. And the second one, what I see and which really scares me more and more is that we see that the commons are being

exploited for privatized gains. For instance, all the big LLMs, right, trained by Google, OpenAI , Anthropic right, they are being trained on things that people put out in the internet in good faith, right, by Wikipedia. And now suddenly all that wealth creation is, as you said, being sucked up the pyramid to literally a handful of people that suddenly become the world's richest and most powerful influential people because

they have been sucking out the life of these systems. And now you see that a lot of these forums, Wikipedia is slowly, well, decaying or dying ⁓ coding communities like Stack Overflow that used to be buzzing where programmers would exchange advice and are dying off because now everything is being sucked into these LLM machines. So my question is,

Jeremy Lent (45:51)
That's right.

Yeah.

Dmitrij Achelrod (46:11)
How can you defend also against these kind of dynamics? There's a vortex that keeps pulling things into it. And it's getting stronger and stronger. With exponential tech, it's going to be more more difficult.

Jeremy Lent (46:18)
That's right. Yeah.

Completely right. And these are such critical points you raised, Dmitrij and thank you for doing that. I think we need to recognize that everything you're saying is true. The system is working, as I said, doing exactly what it was intended to do, and it's doing it in a more more powerful way to the expense or the detriment of almost all of us. So we have to recognize that. And the first place to begin in changing that is by recognizing that

And by actually recognizing that the one thing the system doesn't want to allow is many of us to envision that there actually is an alternative. There was this famous phrase by Margaret Thatcher that was as a sort of the foundation point of all these decades of neoliberalism when she said, there is no alternative. It was called Tina. Actually, begin my eco-civilization book with exactly that phrase.

That's that notion of cultural hegemony. It's really important for that system success for people to believe there's no alternative. So part of what this book is about and all the work that so many others are doing on these alternatives in the world around us is to assess what's known as systems thinking is an attractor, like almost like a North Pole, a magnetic pole, recognizing there is actually an alternative.

And once millions and millions of us begin to realize there is a real feasible alternative, we can start working together and pulling towards that. And so the last couple of chapters of my book, look at these questions of how change happens and making change happen. part of what I see is we have to recognize that this system, as it's getting more and more powerful in what it's doing, it's also

suffering from its own internal contradictions, the ecological breakdowns, the incredible inequalities that are getting worse and worse day by day. All of those things could lead to this entire system to just unravel. And that's terrifying. And we see that basically happening in the moods towards authoritarianism and the rise of militarism, all the terrible things occurring day to day around us. But it's in that unraveling that the degrees of freedom open up for some of these changes to happen.

And I don't want anyone to make the mistake that I rejoice in that unraveling. It's a terrible process we're all part of, and none of us want that. Anyone with any humanity would not want that. But it is happening. But in that comes these opportunities of a transformation of our system. I mean, one thing we know that this century, this entire world system, I think we can be pretty comfortable about this. Well, we can be pretty sure about this. Comfort is not the right word.

that we're going to experience a great transformation in the human experience, something along the lines of when we moved from hunter gatherers to agriculture, or when the scientific revolution transformed people's lives. What we don't know is what that's going to look like. It could be a total collapse. The system could just go so extreme that the whole thing could collapse. It could be a sort of a fortress earth with most people experiencing some form of collapse while that tiny elite.

basically barricades themselves off and enjoys their techno enhancements with AI and learn how to sort of become transhumans and all this kind of stuff. Morally almost worse in some ways than the total collapse ⁓ if this kind of bifurcation happens in that way. Or it could be a transformation leading to that life affirming future that is possible for us. I'm not going to put odds on those possibilities.

But the point is that if enough of us who all within our hearts as human beings, virtually all of us want that life affirming future, we may not have the money or their political power or the military power to make that happen. But what we have is the power of shared human love for life, for each other and for this living earth. And that's a kind of empowerment that might just allow

these islands of coherence, as we call them, these groups of people already working towards that life-affirming future to come together so as this old system basically cracks open, falls apart, we can maybe build that new system from within that can lead us to that better future.

Dmitrij Achelrod (50:48)
That is a positive note. And maybe that is the right point also where we can end this interview. ⁓

If you could share one wish for people who listen to this conversation, what would it be?

Jeremy Lent (51:07)
Yeah, thank you for that question, Dmitrij. It would be to open to some of the things I was talking about, about looking at your own place within the system and to recognize that that future that I was just talking about is not like a spectator sport. It's not something that somebody else is going to do, but it's something that you and I, the two of us here and anyone listening to this.

is actually participating in whether you like it or not. And so recognizing that kind of choice and what does that mean for the choices that you personally make, that would be my wish for anyone listening today to do that inquiry yourself.

Dmitrij Achelrod (51:49)
Very necessary inquiry. Thank you, Jeremy, for doing this work. I think it is more necessary than ever before. And I deeply respect how much you try to bring people together and make them aware of not only the problems, but also of pathways forward. And of course, we are all kind of looking into uncertain times.

But I find your spirit and your work is hopeful and it's giving me hope. And thank you so much for doing that, Jeremy.

Jeremy Lent (52:25)
Thank you. Thank you for inviting me on today, Dmitrij, and for continuing your podcast, which is such an important contribution in itself. Thank you.

Dmitrij Achelrod (52:34)
Thank you.

